Evolutionarily, if we see a lion running at us,
we didn't have time to calculate the lion's kinetic energy,
and is it optimal to go this way or that way?
You just react it, and physically,
our bodies are well attuned to actually make right decisions.
But when you're playing a game like poker,
this is not something that you ever evolved to do,
and yet you're in that same flight or fight response.
And so that's a really important skill to be able to develop,
to basically learn how to meditate in the moment
and calm yourself so that you can think clearly.
The following is a conversation with Liv Burri,
formerly one of the best poker players in the world,
trained as an astrophysicist
and is now a philanthropist and an educator
on topics of game theory, physics, complexity, and life.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Liv Burri.
What role do you think luck plays in poker and in life?
You can pick whichever one you want,
poker or life and or life.
The longer you play, the less influenced luck has,
you know, like with all things,
the bigger your sample size,
the more the quality of your decisions
or your strategies matter.
So to answer that question, yeah, in poker, it really depends.
If you and I sat and played 10 hands right now,
I might only win 52% of the time, 53% maybe.
But if we played 10,000 hands,
then I'll probably win like over 98, 99% of the time.
So it's a question of sample sizes.
And what are you figuring out over time?
The betting strategy that this individual does
or literally doesn't matter
against any individual over time?
Against any individual over time,
the better player because they're making better decisions.
So what does that mean to make a better decision?
Well, to get into the real nitty gritty already.
Basically, poker is the game of math.
There are these strategies familiar
with like Nash Equilibria that term, right?
So there are these game theory optimal strategies
that you can adopt.
And the closer you play to them,
the less exploitable you are.
So because I've studied the game a bunch,
although admittedly not for a few years,
but back in, you know, when I was playing all the time,
I would study these game theory optimal solutions
and try and then adopt those strategies when I go and play.
So I'd play against you and I would do that.
And because the objective,
when you're playing game theory optimal,
it's actually, it's a loss minimization thing
that you're trying to do.
Your best bet is to try and play a sort of similar style.
You also need to try and adopt this loss minimization.
But because I've been playing much longer than you,
I'll be better at that.
So first of all,
you're not taking advantage of my mistakes,
but then on top of that,
I'll be better at recognizing
when you are playing suboptimally
and then deviating from this game theory optimal strategy
to exploit your bad plays.
Can you define game theory and Nash Equilibria?
Can we try to sneak up to it in a bunch of ways?
Like, what's the game theory framework
of analyzing poker, analyzing any kind of situation?
So game theory is just basically the study of decisions
within a competitive situation.
I mean, it's technically a branch of economics,
but it also applies to like wider decision theory.
And usually when you see it,
it's these like little payoff matrices
and so on, that's how it's depicted.
But it's essentially just like study of strategies
under different competitive situations.
And as it happens, certain games,
in fact, many, many games have these things
called Nash Equilibria.
And what that means is when you're in a Nash Equilibrium,
basically it is not,
there is no strategy that you can take
that would be more beneficial
than the one you're currently taking,
assuming your opponent is also doing the same thing.
So it would be a bad idea,
if we're both playing in a game theory optimal strategy,
if either of us deviate from that,
now we're putting ourselves at a disadvantage.
Rockpapers is actually a really great example of this.
Like if we were to start playing rockpapers,
you know, you know nothing about me
and we're gonna play for all our money,
let's play 10 rounds of it.
What would your sort of optimal strategy be?
Do you think?
What would you do?
Let's see.
I would probably try to be as random as possible.
Exactly, because you don't know anything about me,
you don't want to give anything away about yourself,
so ideally you'd have like a little dice
or somewhat perfect randomizer
that makes you randomize 33% of the time
each of the three different things.
And in response to that,
well, actually I can kind of do anything,
but I would probably just randomize back too,
but actually it wouldn't matter
because I know that you're playing randomly.
So that would be us in a Nash equilibrium
where we're both playing this like unexploitable strategy.
However, if after a while,
you then notice that I'm playing rock
a little bit more often than I should.
Yeah, you're the kind of person that would do that,
wouldn't you?
Sure, yes, yes, yes, I'm more of a scissors girl,
but anyway.
You are?
No, I'm a, as I said, randomizer.
So you notice I'm throwing rock too much
or something like that.
Now you'd be making a mistake
by continuing playing this game theory optimal strategy,
well the previous one,
because you are now there's an,
I'm making a mistake
and you're not deviating and exploiting my mistake.
So you'd want to start throwing paper a bit more often
in whatever you figure is the right sort of percentage
of the time that I'm throwing rock too often.
So that's basically an example of where,
what game theory optimal strategy is
in terms of loss minimization,
but it's not always the maximally profitable thing
if your opponent is doing stupid stuff,
which in that example.
So that's kind of then how it works in poker,
but it's a lot more complex.
And the way poker players typically,
nowadays they study,
the games change so much.
And I think we should talk about how it sort of evolved,
but nowadays like the top pros
basically spend all their time in between sessions
running these simulators using like software
where they do basically Monte Carlo simulations,
sort of doing billions of fictitious self play hands.
You input a fictitious hand scenario,
like, oh, what do I do with Jack 9 suited
on a King 10, four to two spade board
and against this bet size.
So you'd input that, press play,
it'll run, it's billions of fake hands
and then it will converge upon
what the game theory optimal strategies are.
And then you want to try and memorize what these are.
Basically they're like ratios of how often,
what types of hands you want to bluff
and what percentage of the time.
So then there's this additional layer
of inbuilt randomization built in.
Yeah, those kind of simulations incorporate
all the betting strategies and everything else like that.
So as opposed to some kind of very crude mathematical model
of what's the probability you win
just based on the quality of the card,
it's including everything else too.
The game theory of it.
Yes, yeah, essentially.
And what's interesting is that nowadays,
if you want to be a top pro and you go and play
in these really like the super high stakes tournaments
or tough cash games,
if you don't know this stuff,
you're going to get eaten alive in the long run.
But of course you could get lucky over the short run
and that's where this like luck factor comes in
because luck is both a blessing and a curse.
If luck didn't, you know, if there wasn't this random element
and there wasn't the ability for worse players
to win sometimes, then poker would fall apart.
You know, the same reason people don't play chess
professionally for money against you.
You don't see people going and hustling chess,
like not knowing, trying to make a living from it
because you know there's very little luck in chess,
but there's quite a lot of luck in poker.
Have you seen Beautiful Mind, that movie?
Years ago.
Well, what do you think about the game
theoretic formulation of what is it,
the hot blonde at the bar?
Do you remember?
Oh, yeah.
The way they'd illustrated it is
they're trying to pick up a girl at a bar
and there's multiple girls.
They're like, it's like a friend group
when you're trying to approach.
I don't remember the details, but I remember.
Don't you like then speak to her friends?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Just like that, faint disinterest.
I mean, it's classic pickup artists stuff.
Yeah.
And they were trying to correlate that somehow,
that being an optimal strategy, game theoretically.
Why?
What?
Like, I don't think, I remember.
I can't imagine that they were,
I mean, there's probably an optimal strategy.
Is it, does that mean that there's
a natural Nash equilibrium of like picking up girls?
Do you know the marriage problem?
It's optimal stopping.
Yes.
So where it's an optimal dating strategy,
where you, do you remember?
Yeah.
I think it's like something like,
you know, you've got like a set of a hundred people
you're going to look through.
And after how many do you,
now after that,
after going on this many dates out of a hundred,
at what point do you then go,
okay, the next best person I see,
is that the right one?
And I think it's like something like 37%.
It's one over E, whatever that is.
Right.
Which I think is 37%.
Yeah.
I'm going to fact check that.
So, but it's funny under those strict constraints,
then yes, after that many people,
as long as you have a fixed size pool,
then you just picked the next person
that is better than anyone you've seen before.
Yeah.
Have you tried this?
Have you incorporated it?
I'm not one of those people.
And we're going to discuss this.
And what do you mean those people?
I try not to optimize stuff.
I try to listen to the heart.
I don't think I like,
my mind immediately is attracted to optimizing everything.
And I think that if you really give into that kind of addiction
that you lose the joy of the small things,
the minutiae of life, I think.
I don't know.
I'm concerned about the addictive nature
of my personality in that regard.
In some ways, while I think the,
on average people under try and quantify things
or try under optimize, there are some people who,
you know, it's like with all these things,
it's a, you know, it's a balancing act.
I've been on dating apps when I've never used them.
I'm sure they have data on this
because they probably have the optimal stopping control problem.
Cause there aren't a lot of people that use social,
like dating apps are on there for a long time.
So the interesting aspect is like, all right,
how long before you stop looking,
before it actually starts affecting your mind
negatively such that you see dating as a kind of,
A game.
A kind of game versus an actual process of finding somebody
that's gonna make you happy for the rest of your life.
That's really interesting.
They have the data.
I wish they would be able to release that data.
And I do want to.
It's okay.
Cupid, right?
I think they ran a huge, huge study on all of their.
Yeah, they're more data driven.
I think, okay, Cupid folks are.
I think there's a lot of opportunity for dating apps
and you know, even bigger than dating apps,
people connecting on the internet.
I just hope they're more data driven
and it doesn't seem that way.
I think like, I've always thought that
Goodreads should be a dating app.
Like the.
I've never used it.
Goodreads is just lists like books that you've read.
And it allows you to comment on the books you read
and what the books you're currently reading.
But it's a giant social networks of people reading books.
And that seems to be a much better database of like interests.
Of course, to constrain you to the books you're reading,
but like that really reveals so much more about the person
allows you to discover shared interests
because books are kind of window
into the way you see the world.
Also like the kind of places people you're curious about,
the kind of ideas you're curious about.
Are you romantic?
Are you cold calculating rationalist?
Are you, are you into Iron Rand?
Or are you into Bernie Sanders?
Are you into whatever?
Right.
And I feel like that reveals so much more
than like a person trying to look hot
from a certain angle in the Tinder profile.
Well, and it would also be a really great filter
in the first place for people.
It selects people who read books
and are willing to go and rate them
and give feedback on them and so on.
So that's already a really strong filter
or probably the type of people you'd be looking for.
Well, at least be able to fake reading books.
I mean, the thing about books,
you don't really need to read it.
You can just look at the cliff notes.
Yeah, game the dating app by feigning intellectualism.
Can I admit something very horrible about myself?
Go on.
The things that, you know,
I don't have many things in my closet,
but this is one of them.
I've never actually read Shakespeare.
I've only read cliff notes.
And I got a five in the AP English exam.
Wow.
And I had the witch books, have I read?
Well, yeah, which was the exam on which books?
Oh, no, they include a lot of them.
But Hamlet, I don't even know if you read Romeo and Juliet.
Macbeth, I don't remember, but I don't understand it.
It's like really cryptic.
It's hard.
It's really, I don't, and it's not that pleasant to read.
It's like ancient speak.
I don't understand it.
Anyway, maybe I was too dumb.
Man, I'm still too dumb, but I did.
But you got a five, which is.
Yeah, yeah.
I don't know how the U.S. grading system.
Oh, no, so AP English is a,
there's kind of this advanced versions of courses
in high school and you take a test
that is like a broad test for that subject and includes a lot.
It wasn't obviously just Shakespeare.
I think a lot of it was also writing, written.
You have like AP physics, AP computer science,
AP biology, AP chemistry, and then AP English
and AP literature, I forget what it was.
But I think Shakespeare was a part of that.
But I.
And you, and you gave the point is you gave a fight it.
Gave a fight.
Well, entirety, I was into getting A's.
I saw it as a game.
I don't think any, I don't think all the learning I've done
has been outside of the, outside of school.
The deepest learning I've done has been outside of school
with a few exceptions, especially in grad school,
like deep computer science courses.
But that was still outside of school
because it was outside of getting, sorry,
it was outside of getting the A for the course.
The best stuff I've ever done is when you read the chapter
and you do many of the problems at the end of the chapter,
which is usually not what's required for the course.
Like the hardest stuff.
In fact, textbooks are freaking incredible.
If you go back now and you look at like biology textbook
or any of the computer science textbooks
on algorithms and data structures,
those things are incredible.
They have the best summary of a subject.
Plus they have practice problems of increasing difficulty
that allows you to truly master the basic,
like the fundamental ideas behind that.
That was, I got to my entire physics degree
with one textbook that was just this really comprehensive one
that they told us at the beginning of the first year,
buy this, but you're gonna have to buy 15 other books
for all your supplementary courses.
And I was like, every time I was just checked
to see whether this book covered it and it did.
And I think I only bought like two or three extra
and thank God, because they're so super expensive textbooks.
It's a whole racket they've got going on.
Yeah, they are, they could just,
you get the right one, it's just like a manual for,
but what's interesting though,
is this is the tyranny of having exams and metrics.
The tyranny of exams and metrics, yes.
I loved them because I loved, I'm very competitive
and I liked finding ways to gamify things
and then like sort of dust off my shoulders
after when I get a good grade or be annoyed at myself
when I didn't, but yeah, you're absolutely right
in that the actual, you know,
how much of that physics knowledge I've retained?
Like I've, I learned how to cram and study
and please an examiner,
but did that give me the deep lasting knowledge
that I needed?
I mean, yes and no, but really like,
nothing makes you learn a topic better
than when you actually then have to teach it yourself.
You know, like I'm trying to wrap my teeth around this
like game theory, Molek stuff right now.
And there's no exam at the end of it that I can gamify.
There's no way to gamify and sort of like
shortcut my way through it.
I have to understand it so deeply
from like deep foundational levels to then build upon it
and then try and explain it to other people.
And like, you know,
you're about to go and do some lectures, right?
You can't, you can't sort of just like,
you presumably can't rely on the knowledge
that you got through when you were studying for an exam
to reteach that.
Yeah, and especially high level lectures,
especially the kind of stuff you do on YouTube,
you're not just regurgitating material.
You have to think through what is the core idea here.
And when you do the lectures live, especially,
you have to, there's no second takes.
That is the luxury you get if you're recording a video
for YouTube or something like that,
but it definitely is a luxury you shouldn't lean on.
I've gotten to interact with a few YouTubers
that lean on that too much.
And you realize, oh, you're,
you've gamified this system
because you're not really thinking deeply about stuff.
You're through the edit,
both written and spoken.
You're crafting an amazing video,
but you yourself as a human being
have not really deeply understood it.
So live teaching, or at least recording video
with very few takes is a different beast.
And I think it's the most honest way of doing it,
like as few takes as possible.
That's what I'm nervous about this.
Don't go back, you're like,
ah, let's do that.
Don't fuck this up, Liv.
The tyranny of exams.
I do think people talk about high school and college
as a time to do drugs and drink and have fun
and all this kind of stuff.
But, you know, looking back,
of course I did a lot of those things.
No, yes, but it's also a time
when you get to like read textbooks or read books
or learn with all the time in the world.
Like you don't have these responsibilities of like,
you know, laundry and having to sort of pay for mortgage
or all that kind of stuff, pay taxes,
all this kind of stuff.
In most cases, there's just so much time
in the day for learning.
And you don't realize at the time,
because at the time it seems like a chore,
like why the hell does there's so much homework?
But you never get a chance to do this kind of learning,
this kind of homework ever again in life,
unless later in life you really make a big effort out of it.
You get, like you basically, your knowledge gets solidified.
You don't get to have fun and learn.
Learning is really fulfilling and really fun
if you're that kind of person.
Like some people like to, you know,
like knowledge is not something that they think is fun.
But if that's the kind of thing that you think is fun,
that's the time to have fun and do the drugs
and drink and all that kind of stuff.
But the learning, just going back to those textbooks,
the hours spent with the textbooks is really, really rewarding.
Do people even use textbooks anymore?
Yeah.
Do you think?
Because it's these days with their TikTok and there.
Well, not even that, but it's just like so much information,
really high quality information.
You know, it's now in digital format online.
Yeah, but they're not, they are using that,
but you know, college is still very, there's a curriculum.
I mean, so much of school is about rigorous study
of a subject and still on YouTube, that's not there.
Right.
YouTube has, Grant Sanderson talks about this.
He's this math.
331 Brown.
Yeah, 331 Brown.
He says like, I'm not a math teacher.
I just take really cool concepts and I inspire people.
But if you want to really learn calculus,
if you want to really learn linear algebra,
you should do the textbook, you should do that.
You know, and there's still the textbook industrial complex
that like charges like $200 for textbooks somehow.
I don't know.
It's ridiculous.
Well, they're like, oh, sorry, new edition, edition 14.6.
Sorry, you can't use 14.5 anymore.
It's like, what's different?
We've got one paragraph different.
So we mentioned offline, Daniel Negrado.
I'm gonna get a chance to talk to him on this podcast.
And he's somebody that I found fascinating
in terms of the way he thinks about poker,
verbalizes the way he thinks about poker,
the way he plays poker.
So, and he's still pretty damn good.
He's been good for a long time.
So you mentioned that people are running these kinds
of simulations and the game of poker has changed.
Do you think he's adapting in this way?
Do you like the top pros?
Do they have to adopt this way?
Or is there still like over the years,
you basically developed this gut feeling about,
like you get to be like good the way alpha zero is good.
You look at the board and somehow from the fog
comes out the right answer.
Like this is likely what they have.
This is likely the best way to move.
And you don't really,
you can't really put a finger on exactly why,
but it just comes from your gut feeling or no.
Yes and no.
So gut feelings are definitely very important.
That we've got our two mode or you can distill it down
to two modes of decision making, right?
You've got your sort of logical linear voice in your head,
system two as it's often called
and your system on your gut intuition.
And historically in poker,
the very best players were playing almost entirely
by their gut.
You know, often they would do some kind of inspired play
and you'd ask them why they do it
and they wouldn't really be able to explain it.
And that's not so much because their process
was unintelligible,
but it was more just because no one had the language
with which to describe what optimal strategies were
because no one really understood how poker worked.
This was before, you know, we had analysis software,
you know, no one was writing,
I guess some people would write down their hands
in a little notebook,
but there was no way to assimilate all this data
and analyze it.
But then, you know, when computers became cheaper
and software started emerging
and then obviously online poker,
where it would like automatically save your hand histories,
now all of a sudden you kind of had this body of data
that you could run analysis on.
And so that's when people started to see, you know,
these mathematical solutions and so what that meant
is the role of intuition essentially became smaller.
And it went more into as we talked before
about, you know, this game theory optimal style.
But also as I said, like game theory optimal
is about loss minimization and being unexploitable.
But if you're playing against people who aren't,
because no person, no human being can play perfectly
game theory optimal in poker, not even the best AIs,
they're still like, they're 99.99% of the way there
or whatever, but it's kind of like speed of light,
you can't reach it perfectly.
So they're still a role for intuition?
Yes, so when, yeah, when you're playing
this unexploitable style, but when your opponents start
doing something, you know, suboptimal
that you want to exploit, well, now that's where
not only your like logical brain will need to be thinking,
well, okay, I know I have this,
I'm in the sort of top end of my range here with this,
with this hand.
So that means I need to be calling x% of the time
and I put them on this range, et cetera.
But then sometimes you'll have this gut feeling
that will tell you, you know, you know what, this time
I know, I know mathematically I meant to call now,
you know, I've got, I'm in the sort of top end of my range
and this is the odds I'm getting.
So the math says I should call, but there's something
in your gut saying they've got it this time,
they've got it like, they're beating you,
might be your hand is worse.
So then the real art, this is where the last remaining art
in poker, the fuzziness is like, do you listen to your gut?
How do you quantify the strength of it
or can you even quantify the strength of it?
And I think that's what Daniel has.
I mean, I can't speak for how much he's studying
with the simulators and that kind of thing.
I think he has, like he must be to still be keeping up,
but he has an incredible intuition for just,
he's seen so many hands of poker in the flesh.
He's seen so many people, the way they behave
when the chips are, you know, when the money's on the line
and he's got him staring you down in the eye,
you know, he's intimidating.
He's got this like kind of X factor vibe
that he, you know, gives out.
And he talks a lot, which is an interactive element,
which is he's getting stuff from other people.
Yes.
Yeah.
And just like the subtlety.
So he's like, he's probing constantly.
Yeah, he's probing and he's getting this extra layer
of information that others can't.
Now that said though, he's good online as well.
You know, I don't know how, again,
would he be beating the top cash game players online?
Probably not, no.
But when he's in person
and he's got that additional layer of information,
he can not only extract it,
but he knows what to do with it still so well.
There's one player who I would say is the exception
to all of this.
And he's one of my favorite people to talk about
in terms of, I think he might have cracked the simulation.
It's Phil Helmuth, he...
In more ways than one.
He's cracked the simulation, I think.
Yeah, he somehow to this day is still,
and I love you, Phil, I'm not in any way knocking you,
he's still winning so much
at the World Series of Pogo specifically.
He's now won 16 bracelets.
The next nearest person I think has won 10.
And he is consistently year in, year out,
going deep or winning these huge field tournaments.
You know, with like 2,000 people,
which statistically he should not be doing.
And yet, you watch some of the plays he makes
and they make no sense.
Like mathematically, they are so far
from game theory optimal.
And the thing is, if you went and stuck him
in one of these high stakes cash games
with a bunch of like GTO people,
he's gonna get ripped apart.
But there's something that he has
that when he's in the halls
of the World Series of Pogo specifically,
amongst sort of amateurish players,
he gets them to do crazy shit like that.
And, but my little pet theory is that also,
he just the car, he's like a wizard
and he gets the cards to do what he needs them to.
Because he just expects to win
and he expects to receive, you know,
to get flopper set with a frequency far beyond what this,
you know, the real percentages are.
And I don't even know
if he knows what the real percentages are.
He doesn't need to because he gets that.
I think he has found the Chico.
Because when I've seen him play,
he seems to be like annoyed
that the long shot thing didn't happen.
Yes.
He's like annoyed.
And it's almost like everybody else is stupid
because he was obviously going to win with this.
He's meant to win if that silly thing hadn't happened.
And it's like, you don't understand,
the silly thing happens 99% of the time.
And it's a 1%, not the other way round.
But genuinely, for his lived experience at the world's,
only at the world's, it is like that.
So I don't blame him for feeling that way.
But he does, he has this X factor
and the poker community has tried for years
to rip him down saying like, you know, he doesn't,
he's no good, but he's clearly good
because he's still winning or there's something going on.
Whether that's, he's figured out how to mess
with the fabric of reality
and how cards are, you know,
a randomly shuffled deck of cards come out.
I don't know what it is, but he's doing it right still.
Who do you think is the greatest of all time?
Would you put Hellmuth?
Now he's definitely, he seems like the kind of person
would mention he would actually watch this.
So you might want to be careful.
Well, as I said, I love Phil.
And I have, I would say this to his face.
I'm not saying anything.
I don't, he's got, he truly, I mean,
he is one of the greatest.
I don't know if he's the greatest.
He's certainly the greatest at the World Series of Poker.
And he is the greatest at,
despite the game switching into a pure game
or almost an entire game of math,
he has managed to keep the magic alive.
And there's like, just through sheer force of will
making the game work for him.
And that is incredible.
And I think it's something that should be studied
because it's an example.
Yeah, there might be some actual game theoretic wisdom.
There might be something to be said about optimality
from studying him, right?
What do you mean by optimality?
Meaning, or rather game design, perhaps.
Meaning if what he's doing is working,
maybe poker is more complicated
than we're currently modeling it as.
So like, yeah.
Or there's an extra layer,
and I don't mean to get too weird and wooey,
but, or there's an extra layer of ability
to manipulate the things the way you want them to go
that we don't understand yet.
Do you think Phil Helmuth understands them?
Is he just generally.
Hashtag positivity.
Well, he wrote a book on positivity, and he.
He has.
He did.
Not like a trolling book.
No.
A serious.
Straight up, yeah.
Phil Helmuth wrote a book about positivity.
Yes.
Okay.
About, I think, and I think it's about sort of manifesting
what you want and getting the outcomes that you want
by believing so much in yourself
and in your ability to win, like eyes on the prize.
And I mean, it's working.
The man's delivered.
But where do you put like Phil Ivy
and all those kinds of people?
I mean, I'm too, I've been, to be honest,
too much out of the scene
for the last few years to really,
I mean, Phil Ivy's clearly got, again,
he's got that X factor.
He's so incredibly intimidating to play against.
I've only played against him a couple of times,
but when he like looks you in the eye
and you're trying to run a bluff on him,
oof, no one's made me sweat harder than Phil Ivy.
Just my bluff got through, actually.
That was actually one of the most thrilling moments
I've ever had in poker was it was in a Monte Carlo
in a high roller.
I can't remember exactly what the hand was,
but I, you know, a three bit
and then like just barreled all the way through.
And he just like put his laser eyes into me.
And I felt like he was just scouring my soul.
And I was just like, hold it together, live,
hold it together.
And he was like, hold it.
You knew your hand was weaker.
Yeah. I mean, I was bluffing.
I presume, which, you know,
there's a chance I was bluffing with the best hand,
but I'm pretty sure my hand was worse.
And he folded.
I was truly one of the deep highlights of my career.
Did you show the cards or did you fall?
What is it?
You should never show in game.
Because especially as I felt like I was one
of the worst players at the table in that tournament.
So giving that information,
unless I had a really solid plan
that I was now like advertising or look,
I'm capable of bluffing Phil Ivy,
but like why, it's much more valuable
to take advantage of the impression that they have of me,
which is like, I'm a scared girl
playing a high roller for the first time.
Keep that going, you know.
Interesting.
But isn't there layers to this?
Like psychological warfare that the scared girl
might be way smart.
And then like just to flip the tables,
do you think about that kind of stuff?
Oh, definitely.
Is it better not to reveal information?
I mean, generally speaking,
you want to not reveal information.
You know, the goal of poker is to be as deceptive
as possible about your own strategies
while elucidating as much out of your opponent
about their own.
So giving them free information,
particularly if they're people
who you consider very good players,
any information I give them
is going into their little database
and I assume it's going to be calculated and used well.
So I have to be really confident
that my like meta gaming that I'm going to then do,
or they've seen this, so therefore that,
I'm going to be on the right level.
So it's better just to keep that little secret
to myself in the moment.
So how much is bluffing part of the game?
Huge amount.
So yeah, I mean, maybe actually, let me ask,
like what did it feel like with Phil Ivey
or anyone else when it's a high stake,
when it's a big, it's a big bluff.
So a lot of money on the table.
And maybe, I mean, what defines a big bluff?
Maybe a lot of money on the table,
but also some uncertainty in your mind and heart
about like self doubt,
well, maybe I miscalculated what's going on here,
what the bet said, all that kind of stuff.
Like what does that feel like?
I mean, it's, I imagine comparable to,
you know, running a, I mean,
any kind of big bluff where you have a lot of something
that you care about on the line, you know?
So if you're bluffing in a courtroom,
not that I didn't want to ever do that,
or something equatable to that, it's incredible.
You know, in that scenario, you know,
I think it was the first time I'd ever played a 20,
I'd won my way into this 25K tournament.
So that was the buy in, 25,000 euros.
And I had satelliteed my way in
because it was much bigger than I would ever normally play.
And, you know, I hadn't,
I wasn't that experienced at the time.
And now I was sitting there against all the big boys,
you know, the Nogranos, the Phil Ivey's and so on.
And then to like, each time you put the bets out,
you know, you put another bet out, your card.
Yeah, I was on a, what's called a semi bluff.
So there were some cards that could come
that would make my hand very, very strong and therefore win,
but most of the time those cards don't come.
So that is a semi bluff because you're representing,
what are you representing that you already have something?
So I think in this scenario, I had a flush draw to,
so I had two clubs, two clubs came out on the flop,
and then I'm hoping that on the turn and the river,
one will come.
So I have some future equity.
I could hit a club and then I'll have the best hand
in which case, great.
And so I can keep betting and I'll want them to call,
but I'm also got the other way of winning the hand
where if my card doesn't come,
I can keep betting and get them to fold their hand.
And I'm pretty sure that's what the scenario was.
So I had some future equity, but it's still, you know,
most of the time I don't hit that club.
And so I'd rather him just fold
because the pot is now getting bigger and bigger.
And in the end, like I jam all in on the river,
that's my entire tournament on the line.
As far as I'm aware, this might be the one time
I ever get to play a big 25K.
You know, this was the first time I played one.
So it was, it felt like the most momentous thing.
And this was also when I was trying to build myself up,
you know, build my name, a name for myself in poker.
I wanted to get respect.
Destroy everything for you.
It felt like it in the moment.
Like, I mean, it literally does feel
like a form of life and death.
Like your body physiologically
is having that flight or fight response.
What are you doing with your body?
What are you doing with your face?
Are you just like, what are you thinking about?
Well, a mixture of like, okay, what are the cards?
So in theory, I'm thinking about like, okay,
what are cards that make my hand look stronger?
Which cards hit my perceived range from his perspective?
Which cards don't?
What's the right amount of bet size to, you know,
maximize my fold equity in this situation?
You know, that's the logical stuff
that I should be thinking about.
But I think in reality, because I was so scared,
because there's this, at least for me,
there's a certain threshold of like nervousness or stress
beyond which the like logical brain shuts off.
And now it just gets into this like,
it just like, it feels like a game of wits basically.
It's like, of nerve.
Can you hold your resolve?
And it certainly got by that, like by the river.
I think by that point, I was like,
I don't even know if this is a good bluff anymore,
but fuck it, let's do it.
Your mind is almost numb
from the intensity of that feeling.
I call it the white noise.
And that's, and it happens in all kinds of decision making.
I think anything that's really, really stressful.
Like I can imagine someone in like an important job interview,
if it's like a job they've always wanted
and they're getting grilled, you know,
like Bridgewater style where they ask these really hard,
like mathematical questions.
You know, that's, it's a really learned skill
to be able to like subdue your flight or fight response,
you know, what I think get from the sympathetic
into the parasympathetic.
So you can actually, you know,
engage that voice in your head
and do those slow logical calculations.
Cause evolutionarily, we, you know,
if we see a lion running at us,
we didn't have time to sort of calculate
the lion's kinetic energy and, you know,
is it optimal to go this way or that way?
You just react it.
And physically, our bodies are well attuned
to actually make right decisions.
But when you're playing a game like poker,
this is not something that you ever, you know,
evolved to do.
And yet you're in that same flight or fight response.
And so that's a really important skill
to be able to develop to basically learn
how to like meditate in the moment
and calm yourself so that you can think clearly.
But as you were searching for a comparable thing,
it's interesting cause you just made me realize
that bluffing is like an incredibly
high stakes form of lying.
You're lying.
And I don't think you can...
You're telling a story.
No, no, it's straight up lying.
In the context of game, it's not a negative kind of lying.
But it is, yeah, exactly.
You're representing something that you don't have.
And I was thinking like,
in how often in life do we have such high stakes of lying?
Cause I was thinking certainly in high level military
strategy, I was thinking when Hitler was lying to Stalin
about his plans to invade the Soviet Union.
And so you're talking to a person like your friends
and you're fighting against the enemy,
whatever the formulation of the enemy is.
But meanwhile, the whole time you're building up troops
on the border.
That's extremely...
Wait, wait, so Hitler and Stalin were like pretending
to be friends?
Well, my history knowledge is terrible.
That's crazy.
Yeah, that they were, yeah, man.
And it worked because Stalin until the troops crossed
the border and invaded in Operation Barbarossa
where this storm of Nazi troops invaded
large parts of the Soviet Union.
And hence one of the biggest wars in human history began.
Stalin for sure was thought that this was never going to be,
that Hitler is not crazy enough to invade the Soviet Union.
That it makes geopolitically makes total sense
to be collaborators.
And ideologically, even though there's a tension
between communism and fascism or national socialism,
however you formulated, it still feels like
this is the right way to battle the West.
Right, they were more ideologically aligned.
They in theory had a common enemy, which is the West.
So it made total sense.
And in terms of negotiations and the way things
were communicated, it seemed to Stalin that for sure
that they would remain at least for a while
peaceful collaborators.
And everybody, because of that in the Soviet Union,
believe that it was a huge shock when Kiev was invaded.
And you hear echoes of that when I traveled to Ukraine
sort of the shock of the invasion.
It's not just the invasion on one particular border,
but the invasion of the capital city.
And just like, holy shit, especially at that time
when you thought World War I,
you realized that that was the war to end all wars.
You would never have this kind of war.
And holy shit, this person is mad enough
to try to take on this monster in the Soviet Union.
So it's no longer going to be a war of hundreds
of thousands dead.
It'll be a war of tens of millions dead.
And yeah, but that's a very large scale kind of lie,
but I'm sure there's in politics and geopolitics
that kind of lying happening all the time.
And a lot of people pay financially
and with their lives for that kind of lying.
But in our personal lives, I don't know how often we,
maybe we...
I think people do.
I mean, like think of spouses cheating on their partners,
right?
And then like having to lie like,
where were you last night?
Stuff like that.
Like that's, I think, you know,
I mean, unfortunately that stuff happens all the time, right?
So...
Or having like multiple families, that one is great.
When each family doesn't know about the other one
and like maintaining that life,
there's probably a sense of excitement about that too.
Seems unnecessary, yeah.
But why?
Well, just lying, like, you know,
the truth finds a way of coming out, you know?
Yes, but hence that's the thrill.
Yeah, perhaps, yeah, people.
I mean, you know, that's why I think actually like poker,
what's so interesting about poker is most of the best
players I know, they're always exceptions, you know,
they're always bad eggs,
but actually poker players are very honest people.
I would say they are more honest than the average,
you know, if you just took random population sample.
Because A, you know, I think, you know,
humans like to have that.
Most people like to have some kind of, you know,
mysterious, you know, an opportunity to do something
like a little edgy.
So we get to sort of scratch that itch of being edgy
at the poker table where it's like, it's part of the game.
Everyone knows what they're in for and that's allowed.
And you get to like really get that out of your system.
And then also like poker players learned that, you know,
I would play in a huge game against some of my friends,
even my partner Igor, where we will be, you know,
absolutely going at each other's throats,
trying to draw blood in terms of winning each money
off each other and like getting under each other's skin,
winding each other up, doing the craftiest moves we can.
But then once the game's done, the, you know,
the winners and the losers will go off and get a drink
together and have a fun time and like talk about it
in this like weird academic way afterwards.
Because that, and that's why games are so great.
Cause you get to like live out or like this competitive urge
that, you know, most people have.
What's it feel like to lose?
Like we talked about bluffing when it worked out.
What about when you, when you go broke?
So like in a game, I'm, you know,
fortunately I've never gone broke.
You mean in like full life?
Full life, no.
I know plenty of people who have.
And I don't think Igor would mind me saying,
he went, you know, he went broke once in poker bowl,
you know, early on when we were together.
I feel like you haven't lived unless you've gone broke.
Oh, yeah.
In some sense.
Right.
It's a fundamental sense.
I mean, I'm happy.
I've sort of lived through it vicariously through him
when he did it at the time.
But yeah, what's it like to lose?
Well, it depends.
So it depends on the amount.
It depends what percentage of your net worth
you've just lost.
It depends on your brain chemistry.
It really, you know, varies from person to person.
You have a very cold calculating way of thinking about this.
So it depends what percentage you have.
Well, it did.
It really does, right?
Yeah, it's true.
But that's, I mean, that's another thing
poker trains you to do.
You see, you see everything in percentages
or you see everything in like ROI
or expected hourly's or cost benefit, et cetera.
You know, so that's, one of the things I've tried to do
is calibrate the strength of my emotional response
to the win or loss that I've received.
Because it's no good if you like, you know,
you have a huge emotional dramatic response to a tiny loss.
Or on the flip side, you have a huge win
and you're sort of dead inside that you don't even feel it.
Well, that's, you know, that's a shame.
I want my emotions to calibrate with reality
as much as possible.
So yeah, what's it like to lose?
I mean, I've had times where I've lost, you know,
busted out of a tournament that I thought I was going to win in.
You know, especially if I got really unlucky
or I make a dumb play where I've gone away
and like, you know, kicked the wall, punched a wall.
I like nearly broke my hand one time.
Like I'm a lot less competitive than I used to be.
Like I was like pathologically competitive
in my like late teens, early twenties.
I just had to win at everything.
And I think that sort of slowly waned as I've gotten older.
According to you, yeah.
According to me.
I don't know if others would say the same, right?
I feel like ultra competitive people,
like I've heard Joroh can say this to me.
It's like, he's a lot less competitive than he used to be.
I don't know about that.
Oh, I believe it.
No, I totally believe it.
Like, because as you get, you can still be like,
I care about winning.
Like when, you know, I play a game with my buddies online
or, you know, whatever it is,
polytopia is my current obsession.
Like, when I...
Thank you for passing on your obsession to me.
Are you playing now?
Yeah, I'm playing now.
We're going to have a game.
But I'm terrible and I enjoy playing terribly.
I don't want to have a game
because that's going to pull me into your monster
of like competitive play.
It's important.
It's an important skill.
I'm enjoying playing on the...
I can't...
You just do the points thing, you know, against the bots.
Yeah, against the bots.
And I can't even do the...
There's like a hard one and there's a very hard one.
And then it's crazy, yeah.
It's crazy.
I don't even enjoy the hard one.
The crazy I really don't enjoy.
Because it's intense.
You have to constantly try to win
as opposed to enjoy building a little world and...
Yeah, no, no, there's no time for exploration of polytopia.
You've got to get...
Well, once you graduate from the crazies,
then you can come play the...
Graduate from the crazies.
Yeah, in order to be able to play a decent game against,
like, you know, our group,
you'll need to be consistently winning
like 90% of games against 15 crazy bots.
Yeah.
And you'll be able to...
Like, I could teach you it within a day, honestly.
How to beat the crazies?
How to beat the crazies.
And then you'll be ready for the big leagues.
Generalizes to more than just polytopia.
But okay, why were we talking about polytopia?
Losing hurts.
Losing hurts. Oh, yeah.
Yes, competitiveness over time.
Oh, yeah.
I think it's more that, at least for me,
I still care about winning when I choose to play something.
It's just that I don't see the world as zero some as I used to be, you know?
I think as you one gets older and wiser,
you start to see the world more as a positive something.
Or at least you're more aware of externalities
of scenarios, of competitive interactions.
And so, yeah, I'm more aware of my own, you know, like,
if I have a really strong emotional response to losing,
and that makes me then feel shitty for the rest of the day.
And then I beat myself up mentally for it.
Like, I'm now more aware that that's unnecessary negative externality.
So I'm like, okay, I need to find a way to turn this down,
you know, dial this down a bit.
Was poker the thing that has...
If you think back at your life
and think about some of the lower points of your life,
like the darker places you've gone in your mind,
did it have to do something with poker?
Like, did losing spark the descent into darkness,
or was it something else?
Um, I think my darkest points in poker
were when I was wanting to quit and move on to other things.
But I felt like I hadn't ticked all the boxes I wanted to tick.
Like, I wanted to be the most winningest female player,
which is by itself a bad goal.
Um, you know, that was one of my initial goals,
and I was like, well, I haven't...
You know, and I wanted to win a WPT event.
I've won one of these, I've won one of these,
but I won one of those as well.
And that sort of, again, like,
is a drive of, like, overoptimization
to random metrics that I decided were important,
without much wisdom at the time,
but then, like, carried on.
Um, that made me continue chasing it longer
than I still actually had the passion to chase it for.
And I don't have any regrets that, you know,
I played for as long as I did, because who knows,
you know, I wouldn't be sitting here,
I wouldn't be living this incredible life
that I'm living now.
Um, this is the height of your life right now.
This is it, peak experience.
Absolute pinnacle here in your robot land.
Yeah, yeah.
With your creepy light.
No, it is.
I mean, I wouldn't change a thing about my life right now,
and I feel very blessed to say that.
So, but the dark times were in the sort of, like,
2016 to 18, even sooner, really,
where I was like, I had stopped loving the game,
and I was going through the motions.
And I would, and then I was like,
you know, I would take the loss as harder
than I needed to, because I'm like,
oh, it's another one.
And it was, I was aware that, like,
I felt like my life was ticking away,
and I was like, is this going to be what's on my tombstone?
Oh, yeah, she played the game of, you know,
this zero sum game of poker,
slightly more optimally than her next opponent.
Like, cool, great legacy, you know.
I just wanted, you know, there was something in me
that knew I needed to be doing something
more directly impactful, and just meaningful.
It was just like a search for meaning,
and I think it's a thing a lot of poker players,
even a lot of, I imagine any games players who sort of love
intellectual pursuits, you know,
I think you should ask Magnus Carlson this question.
Yeah, walking away from chess, right?
Yeah, like, it must be so hard for him.
You know, he's been on the top for so long,
and it's like, well, now what?
He's got this incredible brain, like, what to put it to.
And yeah, it's...
It's this weird moment where I was just
spoken with people that won multiple gold medals at the Olympics,
and the depression hits hard after you win.
Don't come in crash.
Because it's a kind of a goodbye, saying goodbye to that person
to all the dreams you had that you thought would give meaning
to your life.
But in fact, life is full of constant pursuits of meaning.
It doesn't...
You don't, like, arrive and figure it all out,
and there's endless bliss.
Now it continues going on and on.
You constantly have to figure out to rediscover yourself.
And so for you, like, that struggle to say goodbye to poker,
you have to, like, find the next...
There's always a bigger game.
That's the thing.
That's my motto.
It's like, what's the next game?
And more importantly, because obviously,
game usually implies zero sum.
Like, what's the game which is, like, OmniWin?
Look, what?
OmniWin.
Why is OmniWin so important?
Because if everyone plays zero sum games,
that's a fast track to either completely stagnate as a civilization,
but more actually far more likely to extinct ourselves.
You know, like, the playing field is finite.
You know, nuclear powers are playing, you know,
a game of poker with their chips of nuclear weapons, right?
And the stakes have gotten so large
that if anyone makes a single bet, you know,
fires some weapons, the playing field breaks.
I made a video on this.
Like, you know, the playing field is finite.
And if we keep playing these adversarial zero sum games,
thinking that in order for us to win,
someone else has to lose.
Or if we lose that someone else wins, that will extinct us.
It's just a matter of when.
What do you think about that mutually assured destruction?
That very simple, almost to the point of caricaturing game theory idea
that does seem to be at the core of why we haven't blown each other up yet with nuclear weapons.
Do you think there's some truth to that?
This kind of stabilizing force of mutually assured destruction?
And do you think that's going to hold up through the 21st century?
I mean, it has held, yes.
There's definitely truth to it that it was a, you know,
it's a Nash equilibrium.
Yeah, are you surprised it held this long?
Isn't it crazy?
It is crazy when you factor in all the, like,
near miss accidental firings.
Yes.
That makes me wonder, like, you know,
you're familiar with the, like, quantum suicide thought experiment,
where it's basically like you have a,
you know, like a Russian roulette type scenario hooked up to some kind of quantum event,
you know, particle splitting or periparticle splitting.
And if it, you know, if it goes A,
then the gun doesn't go off and it goes B,
then it does go off and it kills you.
Because you can only ever be in the universe,
you know, assuming like the Everett branch, you know,
multiverse theory, you'll always only end up in the branch
where you continually make, you know, option A comes in.
But you run that experiment enough times,
it starts getting pretty damn, you know, out of the tree gets huge.
There's a million different scenarios,
but you'll always find yourself in this,
in the one where it didn't go off.
And so from that perspective, you are essentially immortal,
because someone, and you will only find yourself
in the set of observers that make it down that path.
Yeah.
So it's, it's kind of.
That doesn't mean, that doesn't mean you're,
you're still not going to be fucked at some point in your life.
No, of course not.
No, I'm not, I'm not advocating,
like we're all immortal because of this.
It's just like a fun thought experiment.
And the point is it like raises this thing of like these things
called observer selection effects, which Bostrom,
and Nick Bostrom talks about a lot,
and I think people should go read.
It's really powerful,
but I think it could be overextended that logic.
I'm not sure exactly how it can be.
I just feel like you can get,
you can overgeneralize that logic somehow.
Well, no, I mean, it leads you into like solipsism,
which is a very dangerous mindset.
Again, if everyone like falls into solipsism of like,
well, I'll be fine.
I mean, that's a great way of creating a very,
you know, self terminating environment.
But my point is, is that with the nuclear weapons thing,
there have been at least, I think it's 12 or 11,
near misses of like just stupid things.
Like there was moonrise over Norway,
and it made weird reflections of some glaciers in the mountains,
which set off, I think, the alarms of NORAD,
NORAD radar, and that put them on high alert, nearly ready to shoot.
And it was only because the head of Russian military
happened to be at the UN in New York at the time,
that they go like, well, wait a second,
why would they fire now when their guy is there?
And it was only that lucky happenstance,
which doesn't happen very often,
where they didn't then escalate it into firing.
And there's a bunch of these different ones.
Stanislav Petrov, like saved the person
who should be the most famous person on earth,
because he's probably on expectations,
saved the most human lives of anyone,
like billions of people by ignoring Russian orders to fire,
because he felt in his gut that actually this was a false alarm,
and it turned out to be, you know, very hard thing to do.
And there's so many of those scenarios
that I can't help but wonder at this point,
that we aren't having this kind of like selection effect thing going on,
because you look back and you're like, geez,
that's a lot of near misses.
But of course, we don't know the actual probabilities
that they would have lent each one would have ended up in nuclear war.
Maybe they were not that likely.
But still, the point is, it's a very dark,
stupid game that we're playing.
And it is an absolute moral imperative, if you ask me,
to get as many people thinking about ways
to make this like very precarious,
because we're in a Nash equilibrium,
but it's not like we're in the bottom of a pit.
You know, if you would like map it topographically,
it's not like a stable ball at the bottom of a thing.
We're not in equilibrium because of that.
We're on the top of a hill with a ball balanced on top,
and just any little nudge could send it flying down,
and, you know, nuclear war pops off and hellfire and bad times.
On the positive side, life on earth will probably still continue,
and another intelligent civilization might still pop up.
Maybe, yeah.
It depends on the X risk.
Nuclear war, sure, that's one of the perhaps less bad ones.
Green goo through synthetic biology, very bad.
It will turn, you know, destroy all, you know, organic matter through,
you know, it's basically like a biological paperclip maximizer,
also bad, or AI type, you know, mass extinction thing as well would also be bad.
Shh, they're listening.
There's a robot right behind you.
Okay, wait, so let me ask you about this.
From a game theory perspective,
do you think we're living in a simulation?
Do you think we're living inside a video game created by somebody else?
Well, so what was the second part of the question?
Do I think we're living in a simulation and?
A simulation that is observed by somebody for purpose of entertainment,
so like a video game.
Are we listening?
Are we, because there's a, it's like Phil Hellmuth type of situation, right?
There's a creepy level of like,
this is kind of fun and interesting.
Like there's a lot of interesting stuff going on.
I mean, that could be somehow integrated into the evolutionary process,
where the way we perceive and are.
Are you asking me if I believe in God?
Sounds like it.
Kind of, but God seems to be not optimizing in the different formulations of God that we conceive of.
He doesn't seem to be, or she optimizing for like personal entertainment.
Maybe the older gods did, but the, you know, just like the,
basically like a teenager in their mom's basement,
watching, create a fun universe to observe.
So kind of crazy shit might happen.
Okay, so to try and answer this.
Do I think there is some kind of extraneous intelligence to our,
you know, classic measurable universe that we, you know, can measure with,
you know, through our current physics and instruments?
I think so, yes.
Partly because I've had just small little bits of evidence in my own life,
which have made me question, like, so I was a diehard atheist.
Even five years ago, you know, I got into like the rationality community,
big fan of less wrong, continue to be incredible resource.
But I've just started to have too many little
snippets of experience, which don't make sense with the current sort of purely materialistic
explanation of how reality works.
Isn't that just like a humbling practical realization that we don't know how reality works?
Isn't that just a reminder to yourself?
Yeah, no, it's a reminder of epistemic humility, because I felt too hard,
you know, same as people, like, I think, you know, many people who are just like,
my religion is the way, this is the correct way, this is the work, this is the law.
You are immoral if you don't follow this, blah, blah, blah.
I think they are lacking epistemic humility.
They're a little too much hubris there.
But similarly, I think the sort of the Richard Dawkins brand of atheism is too rigid as well
and doesn't, you know, there's a way to try and navigate these questions,
which still honors the scientific method, which I still think is our best sort of realm of like
reasonable inquiry, you know, a method of inquiry.
So an example, I have two kind of notable examples that like really rattled my cage.
The first one was actually in 2010, early on in my poker career.
And I remember the Icelandic volcano that erupted that like shut down kind of all
Atlantic airspace.
And it meant I got stuck down in the south of France.
I was there for something else.
And I couldn't get home.
And someone said, well, there's a big poker tournament happening in Italy.
Maybe do you want to go?
I was like, oh, right, sure.
Like, let's, you know, got a train across, found a way together.
And the buy in was 5,000 euros, which was much bigger than my bankroll would normally allow.
And so I played a feeder tournament, won my way in, kind of like I did with the Monte Carlo,
big one.
So then I won my way, you know, from 500 euros into 5,000 euros to play this thing.
And on day one of then the big tournament, which turned out to have,
it was the biggest tournament ever held in Europe at the time.
It got over like 1,200 people, absolutely huge.
And I remember they dimmed the lights for before, you know, the normal shuffle up and
deal to tell everyone to start playing. And they played Chemical Brothers, Hey Boy, Hey Girl,
which I don't know why it's notable, but it was just like a really, it was a song I always liked.
It was like one of these like pump me up songs.
And I was sitting there thinking, oh, yeah, it's exciting.
I'm playing this really big tournament.
And out of nowhere, just suddenly this voice in my head, just it sounded like my own sort of,
you know, when you say, you think in your mind, you hear a voice kind of, right?
At least I do.
And so it sounded like my own voice.
And it said, you are going to win this tournament.
And it was so powerful that I got this like wave of like, you know,
this sort of goosebumps down my body.
And that I even, I remember looking around being like, did anyone else hear that?
And obviously people are in their phones like no one else heard it.
And I was like, okay, six days later, I win the fucking tournament out of 1,200 people.
And I said, I don't know how to explain it.
Okay. Yes. Maybe I have that feeling before every time I play.
And it's just that I happen to, you know, because I won the tournament,
I retroactively remembered it.
Or the, or the feeling gave you a kind of, now from the film Hellmuthian.
Well, exactly.
Like it gave you a confident, a deep confidence.
And it did, it definitely did.
Like I remember then feeling this like sort of, well, although I remember then on day one,
I then went and lost half my stack quite early on.
And I remember thinking like, oh, that was bullshit.
You know, what kind of premonition is this?
Thinking, oh, I'm out.
But, you know, I managed to like keep it together and recover.
And then, and then just went like pretty perfectly from then on.
And either way, it definitely instilled me with this confidence.
And I don't want to put a, I don't, I can't put an explanation.
Like, you know, was it some, you know, huge extra, extra supernatural thing driving me?
Or was it just my own self confidence in someone that just made me make the right decisions?
I don't know.
And I don't, I'm not going to put a frame on it.
And I think I know a good explanation.
So we're a bunch of NPCs living in this world created by in the simulation.
And then people, not people, creatures from outside of the simulation
sort of can tune in and play your character.
And that feeling you got is somebody just like,
they got to play a poker tournament through you.
Honestly, it felt like that.
It did actually feel a little bit like that.
But it's been 12 years now.
I've retold this story many times.
Like, I don't even know how much I can trust my memory.
You're just an NPC retelling the same story.
Because they just played the tournament and left.
Yeah.
They're like, oh, that was fun.
Cool.
Yeah, cool.
Next.
And now you're for the rest of your life left as a boring NPC retelling this great greatness.
Well, what was interesting was that after that, then I didn't obviously
win a major tournament for quite a long time.
And it left.
That was actually another sort of dark period because I had this incredible,
like the highs of winning that just on a material level were insane, winning the money.
I was on the front page of newspapers because there was this girl that came out of nowhere
and won this big thing.
And so again, chasing that feeling was difficult.
But then on top of that, that was this feeling of almost being touched by something
bigger that was like, uh.
And also maybe did you have a sense that I might be somebody special?
Like this kind of, I think that's the confidence thing that maybe you could do something special
in this world after all kind of feeling.
I definitely, I mean, this is the thing I think everybody wrestles with to an extent, right?
We all, we are truly the protagonists in our own lives.
And so it's a natural bias, human bias to feel, to feel special.
And I think, and in some ways we are special.
Every single person is special because you are that the universe does,
the world literally does revolve around you.
That's the thing in some respect.
But of course, if you then zoom out and take the amalgam of everyone's experiences,
then no, it doesn't.
So there is this shared sort of objective reality,
but sorry, this objective reality that is shared.
But then there's also this subjective reality, which is truly unique to you.
And I think both of those things coexist and it's not like one is correct and one isn't.
And again, anyone who's like, uh, oh no, your lived experience is everything versus
your lived experience is nothing.
No, it's, it's, it's a blend between these two things.
They can exist concurrently.
But there's a certain kind of sense that at least I've had my whole life.
And I think a lot of people have this as like, well, I'm just like this little person.
And surely I can't be one of those people that do the big thing, right?
There's all these big people doing big things.
There's big actors and actresses, big musicians.
There's big business owners and all that kind of stuff, scientists and so on.
I, you know, I have my own subjective experience that I enjoy and so on,
but there's like a different layer, like, um, surely I can't do those great things.
I mean, one of the things just having interacted with a lot of great people,
I realized, no, they're like just the same, the same, the same humans as me.
And that realization I think is really empowering.
And like to remind yourself.
But are they?
Huh?
Are they?
Well, it depends on some, yeah.
They're like a bag of insecurities and peculiar sort of like their own little weirdness and so on.
I should say also not, they have the capacity for brilliance, but they're not
generically brilliant.
Like, you know, we tend to say this person or that person is brilliant,
but really, no, they're just like sitting there and thinking through stuff, just like the rest of us.
Right.
I think they're in the habit of thinking through stuff seriously.
And they've built up a habit of not allowing them their mind to get trapped in a bunch of
bullshit and minutiae of day to day life.
They really think big ideas, but those big ideas, it's like allowing yourself the freedom
to think big, to realize that you can be one that actually solve this particular big problem.
First identify a big problem that you care about, then like I can actually be the one
that solves this problem.
And like allowing yourself to believe that.
And I think sometimes you do need to have like that shock go through your body and a voice
tells you you're going to win this tournament.
Well, exactly.
And whether it was, it's this idea of useful fictions.
So again, like going through all like the classic rationalist training of less wrong,
where it's like, you want your map, the image you have of the world in your head to as accurately
match up with how the world actually is.
You want the map and the territory to perfectly align as, you know, you want it to be as an
accurate representation as possible.
I don't know if I fully subscribe to that anymore.
Having now had these moments of like feeling of something either bigger or just actually just
being overconfident.
Like there is value in overconfidence sometimes.
I do.
If you would, you know, take, you know, take Magnus Carlson, right?
If he, I'm sure from a young age, he knew he was very talented.
But I wouldn't be surprised if he was also had something in him to, well, actually, maybe
he's a bad example because he truly is the world's greatest.
But someone who is unclear whether they were going to be the world's greatest but ended up
doing extremely well because they had this innate deep self confidence, this like even
overblown idea of how good their relative skill level is.
That gave them the confidence to then pursue this thing and like with the kind of focus
and dedication that it requires to excel in whatever it is you're trying to do, you know?
And so there are these useful fictions and that's where I think I diverge slightly with
the classic, the classic sort of rationalist community because that's a field that is worth
studying of like how the stories we tell, what the stories we tell to ourselves,
even if they are actually false and even if we suspect they might be false.
How it's better to sort of have that like little bit of faith, like value in faith,
I think, actually.
And that's partly another thing that's like now led me to explore
the concept of God, whether you want to call it a simulator, the classic
theological thing.
I think we're all like elucidating to the same thing.
Now, I don't know, I'm not saying, you know, because obviously the Christian God is like,
you know, all benevolent, endless love.
The simulation, at least one of the simulation hypothesis is like, as you said,
like a teenager in its bedroom who doesn't really care, doesn't give a shit about the
individuals within there.
It just like wants to see how the thing plays out because it's curious and it could turn it
off like that.
You know, we're on the, you know, we're on the sort of psychopathy to benevolent
spectrum God is, I don't know.
But having this, just having a little bit of faith that there is something else
out there that might be interested in our outcome is, I think, an essential thing,
actually, for people to find.
A, because it creates commonality between us.
It's something we can all share.
And like it is uniquely humbling of all of us to an extent.
It's like a common objective.
But B, it gives people that little bit of like reserve, you know, when things get really dark
and I do think things are going to get pretty dark over the next few years.
But it gives that like, to think that there's something out there that actually wants our
game to keep going.
I keep calling it the game, you know, it's a thing C and I recall it the game.
You and C is AKA Grimes, call what the game?
Everything, the whole thing?
Yeah, we joke about like.
So everything is a game?
Not, well, the universe, like what if it's a game and the goal of the game is to figure
out like, well, either how to beat it, how to get out of it, you know, maybe this universe
is an escape room, like a giant escape room.
And the goal is to figure out, put all the pieces of puzzle, figure out how it works
in order to like unlock this like hyperdimensional key and get out beyond what it is.
No, but then, so you're saying it's like different levels and it's like a cage within
a cage within a cage and never like one cage at a time, you figure out how to do that.
Like a new level up, you know, like us becoming multi planetary would be a level up or us,
you know, figuring out how to upload our consciousnesses to the thing that would
probably be a leveling up or spiritually, you know, humanity becoming more combined and
less adversarial and bloodthirsty and us becoming a little bit more enlightened,
that would be a leveling up.
You know, there's many different frames to it, whether it's physical, you know,
digital or like metaphysical.
I wonder what the level, I think, I think level one for earth is probably
the biological evolutionary process.
So going from single cell organisms to early humans, then maybe level two is
whatever is happening inside our minds and creating ideas and creating technologies.
That's like evolutionary process of ideas.
And then multi planetary is interesting.
Is that fundamentally different from what we're doing here on earth?
Probably, because it allows us to like exponentially scale.
It delays the Malthusian trap, right?
It's a way to make the playing field get larger so that it can accommodate more of our stuff,
more of us.
And that's a good thing, but I don't know if it like fully solves this issue of
well, this thing called Molek, which we haven't talked about yet,
but which is basically, I call it the god of unhealthy competition.
Yeah, let's go to Molek.
What's Molek?
You did a great video on Molek, one aspect of it, the application of it to one aspect.
Instagram beauty filters.
Very niche, I wanted to start off small.
So Molek was originally coined as well, so apparently back in the like
Canaanite times, it was to say ancient Carthaginian.
I can never say Carthagin, somewhere around like 300 BC or 280, I don't know.
There was supposedly this death cult who would sacrifice their children to this awful demon
god thing they called Molek in order to get power to win wars.
So really dark, horrible things, and it was literally like about child sacrifice,
whether they actually existed or not, we don't know, but in mythology they did,
and this god that they worshipped was this thing called Molek.
And then, I don't know, it seemed like it was kind of quiet throughout history
in terms of mythology, beyond that, until this movie Metropolis in 1927 talked about
this, you see that there was this incredible futuristic city that everyone was living great in,
but then the protagonist goes underground into the sewers and sees that the city is run by this
machine, and this machine basically would just kill the workers all the time because it was
just so hard to keep it running, they were always dying, so there was all this suffering
that was required in order to keep the city going, and then the protagonist has this vision
that this machine is actually this demon Molek. So again, it's like this sort of like mechanistic
consumption of humans in order to get more power. And then Alan Ginsberg wrote a poem in the 60s,
which is an incredible poem called Howl about this thing, Molek. And a lot of people sort of
quite understandably take the interpretation of that, he's talking about capitalism.
But then the sort of Pista resistance that's moved Molek into this idea of game theory
was Scott Alexander of Slate's Sarcodex, wrote this incredible one, literally,
I think it might be my favorite piece of writing of all time, it's called Meditations on Molek.
Molek, everyone must go read it. Slate's Sarcodex is a blog.
It's a blog, yes. We can link to it in the show notes or something, right?
Yes, yes. But I like how you assume I have a professional operation going on here.
I shall try to remember. What are you, what are you, what are you, what are you, what are you,
you're giving the impression of it. Yeah, I'll like, please, if I, if I don't,
please somebody in the comments remind me. If you don't know this blog, it's one of the
best blogs ever, probably. You should probably be following it. Are blogs still a thing?
I think they are still a thing. Yeah, he's migrated on to Substack, but yeah, it's still a blog.
Substack, better not fuck things up. I hope not. Yeah. I hope they don't,
I hope they don't turn Molekie, which will mean something to people when we continue.
Yeah. When they stop interrupting for us. No, no, it's fine.
So anyway, so he writes, he writes this, this piece, Meditations on Molek. And basically,
he analyzes the poem and he's like, okay, so it seems to be something relating to
where competition goes wrong. And, you know, Molek was historically this thing of like,
where people would sacrifice a thing that they care about, in this case, children,
their own children, in order to gain power, a competitive advantage.
And if you look at almost everything that sort of goes wrong in our society,
it's that same process. So with the Instagram beauty filters thing, you know,
if you're trying to become a famous Instagram model, you are incentivized to post the hottest
pictures of yourself that you can, you know, you're trying to play that game.
There's a lot of hot women on Instagram. How do you compete against them? You post really
hot pictures and that's how you get more likes. As technology gets better, you know,
more makeup techniques come along. And then more recently, these beauty filters,
where like at the touch of a button, it makes your face look absolutely incredible compared
to your natural natural natural face. These these technologies come along, it's everyone is
incentivized to do that short term strategy. But over on net, it's bad for everyone because
now everyone is kind of like feeling like they have to use these things. And these things like
they make you like the reason why I talked about them in this video is because I noticed it myself,
you know, like, I was trying to grow my Instagram for a while, I've given up on it now. But
yeah, and I noticed these filters, how good they made me look. And I'm like, well,
I know that everyone else is kind of doing it. Subscribe to Liv's Instagram.
Please, so I don't have to use the filters. Post a bunch of yeah, make it blow up.
So yeah, with those, you felt the pressure actually.
Exactly. These short term incentives to do this like, this thing that like either
sacrifices your integrity, or something else, in order to like stay competitive,
which on aggregate, turns like, creates this like sort of race to the bottom spiral where
everyone else ends up in a situation which is worse off than if they hadn't start, you know,
than it were before, kind of like if like at a football stadium, like the system is so badly
designed, a competitive system of like everyone sitting and having a view, that if someone at
the very front stands up to get an even better view, it forces everyone else behind to like
adopt that same strategy just to get to where they were before. But now everyone's stuck standing up,
like, so you need this like top down gods like coordination to make it go back to the better
state. But from within the system, you can't actually do that. So that's kind of what this
MOLIC thing is. It's this thing that makes people sacrifice values in order to optimize for the
winning the game in question, the short term game. But this MOLIC, can you attribute it to
anyone centralized source, or is it an emergent phenomena from a large collection of people?
Exactly that. It's an emergent phenomena. It's a force of game theory. It's a force of bad
incentives on a multi agent system where you've got more, you know, Prisoner's Dilemma is technically
a kind of MOLIC system as well. But it's just a two player thing. But another word for MOLIC is
multi polar trap. Where basically you just got a lot of different people all competing for some
kind of prize. And it would be better if everyone didn't do this one shitty strategy. But because
that strategy gives you a short term advantage, everyone's incentivized to do it. And so everyone
ends up doing it. So the responsibility for social media is a really nice place for a large
number of people to play game theory. And so they also have the ability to then design the rules of
the game. And is it on them to try to anticipate what kind of like to do the thing that poker
players are doing to run simulation? Ideally, that would have been great if, you know, Mark Zuckerberg
and Jack and all the, you know, the Twitter founders and everyone, if they had at least just run a few
simulations of how their algorithms would turn, you know, different types of algorithms would turn
out for society, that would have been great. That's really difficult to do that kind of deep
philosophical thinking about thinking about humanity actually. So not not kind of this level of how do
we optimize engagement? Or what brings people joy in the short term? But how is this thing going to
change the way people see the world? How's it going to get morphed in iterative games played
into something that will change society forever? That requires some deep thinking. That's,
I hope there's meetings like that inside companies, but I haven't seen them.
That's the problem. And it's difficult because, like, when you're starting up a social media
company, you know, you're aware that you've got investors to please, there's bills to pay,
you know, there's only so much R&D you can afford to do. You've got all these like incredible
pressures, you know, bad incentives to get on and just build your thing as quickly as possible
and start making money. And, you know, I don't think anyone intended when they built these
social media platforms and just to like preface it. So the reason why, you know, social media is
relevant because it's a very good example of like everyone these days is optimizing for, you know,
clicks, whether it's a social media platforms themselves because, you know, every click gets
more, you know, impressions and impressions pay for, you know, they get advertising dollars or
whether it's individual influencers or, you know, whether it's the New York Times or whoever,
they're trying to get their story to go viral. So everyone's got this bad incentive of using
click, you know, as you called it, the clickbait industrial complex. That's a very mollkey system
because everyone is now using worse and worse tactics in order to like try and win this attention
game. And yeah, so ideally, these companies would have had enough slack in the beginning
in order to run these experiments to see, okay, what are the ways this could possibly go wrong
for people? Well, what are the ways that mollock, they should be aware of this concept of mollock
and realize that it's, whenever you have a highly competitive multiagent system, which social media
is a classic example of millions of agents all trying to compete for likes and so on, and you
try and bring all this complexity down into like very small metrics such as number of likes,
number of retweets, whatever the algorithm optimizes for, that is a like guaranteed recipe
for this stuff to go wrong and become a race to the bottom. I think there should be an honesty
when founders, I think there's a hunger for that kind of transparency of like, we don't know what
the fuck we're doing. This is a fascinating experiment. We're all running as a human civilization.
Let's try this out. And like, actually, just be honest about this, that we're all like,
these weird rats and amaze, none of us are controlling it. There's this kind of sense,
like the founders, the CEO of Instagram or whatever, Mark Zuckerberg has a control and he's like,
with strings playing people. No, they're... He's at the mercy of this is like everyone else. He's
just like trying to do his best. And like, I think putting on a smile and doing over polished
videos about how Instagram and Facebook are good for you, I think is not the right way to
actually ask some of the deepest questions we get to ask as a society. How do we design the game
such that we build a better world? I think a big part of this as well is people... There's this
philosophy, particularly in Silicon Valley of, well, techno optimism, technology will solve
all our issues. And there's a steelman argument to that, where yes, technology has solved a lot
of problems and can potentially solve a lot future ones. But it can also... It's always
a double edged sword. And particularly as technology gets more and more powerful,
we've now got big data and we're able to do all kinds of psychological manipulation with it and
so on. Technology is not about values neutral thing. People think... I used to always think
this myself. It's like this naive view that, oh, technology is completely neutral. It's the humans
that either make it good or bad. No. To the point we're at now, the technology that we are creating,
they are social technologies. They literally dictate how humans now form social groups and so
on beyond that. And beyond that, it also then... That gives rise to the memes that we then coalesce
around. And that... If you have the stack that way, where it's technology driving social interaction,
which then drives memetic culture and which ideas become popular, that's Moloch.
And we need the other way around. We need it so we need to figure out what are the good memes?
What are the good values that we think we need to optimize for that makes people happy and healthy
and keeps society as robust and safe as possible, then figure out what the social structure around
those should be. And only then do we figure out technology. But we're doing the other way around.
And as much as I love in many ways the culture of Silicon Valley and I do think that technology...
I don't want to knock it. It's done so many wonderful things for us, same as capitalism.
There are... We have to be honest with ourselves. We're getting to a point where we are losing
control of this very powerful machine that we have created.
Can you redesign the machine within the game? Can you just have...
Can you understand the game enough? Okay, this is the game. And this is how we start to reemphasize
the memes that matter, the memes that bring out the best in us. The way I try to be in real life
and the way I try to be online is to be about kindness and love. And I feel like I sometimes
get criticized for being naive and all those kinds of things. But I feel like I'm just trying to live
within this game. I'm trying to be authentic. Yeah, but also like, hey, it's kind of fun to do this.
Like you guys should try this too. And that's like trying to redesign some aspects of the game
within the game. Is that possible? I don't know. But I think we should try. I don't think we have
an option but to try. Well, the other option is to create new companies or to pressure companies
that or anyone who has control of the rules of the game.
I think we need to be doing all of the above. I think we need to be thinking hard about what
are the kind of positive, healthy memes. As Elon said, he who controls the memes controls the
universe. I think he did. But there's truth to that. There is wisdom in that because
memes have driven history. We are a cultural species. That's what sets us apart from chimpanzees
and everything else. We have the ability to learn and evolve through culture as opposed to biology
or like classic physical constraints. And that means culture is incredibly powerful.
And we can create and become victim to very bad memes or very good ones. But we do have some agency
over which memes we not only put out there but we also subscribe to. So I think we need to take
that approach. I'm making this video right now called The Attention Wars which is about how
the media machine is this mollock machine. Well, is this kind of like blind, dumb thing
where everyone is optimizing for engagement in order to win their share of the attention pie?
And then if you zoom out, it's really like mollock that's pulling the strings because the only
thing that benefits from this in the end. Our information ecosystem is breaking down.
You look at the state of the US, we're in a civil war. It's just not a physical war.
It's an information war. And people are becoming more fractured in terms of what their actual
shared reality is. Like truly like an extreme left person, an extreme right person,
they literally live in different worlds in their minds at this point. And it's getting more and
more amplified. And this force is like a razor blade pushing through everything. It doesn't
matter how innocuous the topic is, it will find a way to split into this bifurcated culture war.
And it's fucking terrifying. Because that maximizes the tension. And that's like an emergent
mollock type force that takes anything, any topic and cuts through it so that you can split nicely
into two groups. One that's... All everyone is trying to do within the system is just
maximize whatever gets them the most attention because they're just trying to make money so
they can keep their thing going. And the best emotion for getting attention... Because it's
not just about attention on the internet, it's engagement. That's the key thing. In order for
something to go viral, you need people to actually engage with it. They need to comment or retweet
or whatever. And of all the emotions, there's like seven classic shared emotions that studies
have found that all humans, even from like previously uncontacted tribes have. Some of
those are negative, like sadness, disgust, anger, et cetera. Some are positive, happiness,
excitement, and so on. The one that happens to be the most useful for the internet is anger.
Because anger is such an active emotion. If you want people to engage, if someone's scared... And
I'm not just talking out my ass here, there are studies here that have looked into this.
Whereas if someone's disgusted or fearful, they actually tend to then be like,
I don't want to deal with this. So they're less likely to engage and share it and so on. They're
just going to be like, whereas if they're enraged by a thing, well, now that trick is all the
old tribalism emotions. And so that's how then things get spread much more easily. They outcompete
all the other memes in the ecosystem. And so the attention economy, the wheels that make it go
around is rage. I did a tweet. The problem with raging against the machine is that the machine
has learned to feed off rage because it is feeding off our rage. That's the thing that's
now keeping it going. So the more we get angry, the worse it gets.
So the malloc in this attention, in the war of attention is constantly maximizing rage.
What it is optimizing for is engagement. And it happens to be that engagement
is propaganda. It just sounds like everything is putting... More and more things are being
put through this like propagandist lens of winning whatever the war is in question,
whether it's the culture war or the Ukraine war. Yeah. Well, I think the silver lining of this,
do you think it's possible that in the long arc of this process, you actually do arrive
at greater wisdom and more progress? In the moment, it feels like people are
tearing each other to shreds over ideas. But if you think about it, one of the magic things
about democracy and so on is you have the blue versus red constantly fighting. It's almost like
they're in discourse, creating devil's advocate, making devils out of each other. And through that
process, discussing ideas, like almost really embodying different ideas, just to yell at each
other and through the yelling over the period of decades, maybe centuries, figuring out a better
system. Like in the moment, it feels fucked up. Right. But in the long arc, it actually is productive.
I hope so. That said, we are now in the era of just as we have weapons of mass destruction
with nuclear weapons that can break the whole playing field, we now are developing weapons of
informational mass destruction, information weapons, WMDs that basically can be used for
propaganda or just manipulating people. However, they, you know, is needed, whether that's through
dumb TikTok videos, or, you know, there are significant resources being put in. I don't
mean to sound like, you know, to doom and doom, but there are bad actors out there. That's the
thing. There are plenty of good actors within the system who are just trying to stay afloat in the
game. So we're effectively doing monarchy things. But then on top of that, we have actual bad actors
who are intentionally trying to like manipulate the other side into doing things.
And using, so because it's a digital space, they're able to use artificial actors, meaning bots.
Exactly. Botnets, you know, and this is a whole new situation that we've never had before.
It's exciting. You know what I want to do? Because there is, you know, people are talking
about bots manipulating and like malicious bots that are basically spreading propaganda.
I want to create like a bot army for like, that like fights that, yeah, exactly for love that
fights though, that, I mean, you know, there's the, I mean, there's truth to fight fire with fire.
It's like, but how you always have to be careful whenever you create, again, like
Molek is very tricky. Yeah. Hitler was trying to spread love too.
Yeah. Yeah. So we thought, but you know, I agree with you that like, that is a thing that should
be considered, but there is, again, everyone, the road to hell is paved in good intentions.
And this is, there's always unforeseen circumstance, you know, outcomes, externalities,
if you're trying to adopt a thing, even if you do it in the very best of faith.
But you can learn lessons of history. If you can run some sims on it first.
Absolutely. But also there's certain aspects of a system as we've learned through history that
that do better than others. Like for example, don't have a dictator. So like if I were to create
this bot army, it's not good for me to have full control over it. Because in the beginning,
I might have a good understanding of what's good and not, but over time that starts to get
deviated because I'll get annoyed at some assholes and I'll think, okay, wouldn't it be nice to get
rid of those assholes, but then that power starts getting to your head, you become corrupted.
That's basic human nature. So distribute the power.
We need a love botnet on a DAO. A DAO love botnet.
Yeah. And without a leader. Like without...
Exactly. Distributed, right. But yeah, without any kind of centralized...
Yeah. Without even, you know, basic is the more control, the more you can decentralize the control
of a thing to people, you know, but then you still need the ability to coordinate.
Because that's the issue when if something is too... You know, that's really, to me,
like the culture wars, the bigger war we're dealing with is actually between the sort of the...
I don't know what even the term is for it, but like centralization versus decentralization.
That's the tension we're seeing. Power in control by a few versus completely distributed.
And the trouble is if you have a fully centralized thing, then you're at risk of tyranny,
you know, Stalin type things can happen or completely distributed. Now you're at risk of
complete anarchy and chaos where you can't even coordinate to like on, you know, when there's
like a pandemic or anything like that. So it's like, what is the right balance to strike between
these two structures? Well, can't Molek really take hold in a fully decentralized system?
That's one of the dangers too. Yes.
The very vulnerable to Molek. So the dictator can commit huge atrocities,
but they can also make sure the infrastructure works and...
They have that God's eye view at least. They have the ability to create like laws and rules that
like force coordination, which stops Molek. But then you're vulnerable to that dictator
getting infected with like this, with some kind of psychopathy type thing.
What's reverse Molek?
So great question. So that's where... So I've been working on this series,
it's been driving me insane for the last year and a half. I did the first one a year ago.
I can't believe it's nearly been a year. The second one, hopefully we're coming out in like a month.
And my goal at the end of the series is to like present, because basically I'm painting the picture
of like what Molek is and how it's affecting almost all these issues in our society and how it's,
you know, driving. It's like kind of the generator function, as people describe it,
of existential risk. And then at the end of that...
Wait, wait. The generator function of existential risk. So you're saying Molek is sort of the
engine that creates a bunch of X risks? Yes, not all of them. Like a, you know, a...
Just a cool phrase. Generator function. It's not my phrase. It's Daniel Schmacktenberger.
Oh, Schmacktenberger. I got that from him. Of course.
All things. It's like all roads lead back to Daniel Schmacktenberger, I think.
The dude is brilliant. He's really brilliant.
After that, it's Mark Twain. But anyway, sorry. Totally rude to interrupt this from me.
No, it's fine. So not all X risks. So like an asteroid technically isn't because it's,
you know, it's just like this one big external thing. It's not like a competition thing
going on. But, you know, synthetic bio, you know,
bio weapons, that's one because everyone's incentivized to build, even for defense, you know,
bad, bad viruses, you know, just to threaten someone else, etc. Or AI, technically, the
race to AGI is kind of potentially a Moloky situation. But yeah, so if Moloky is this,
like, generator function that's driving all of these issues over the coming century that might
wipe us out, what's the inverse? And so far, what I've gotten to is this character that I want to
put out there called Winwin. Because Moloky is the God of Lose Lose, ultimately. It masquerades
as the God of Winlose, but in reality, it's Lose Lose. Everyone ends up worse off.
So I was like, well, what's the opposite of that? It's Winwin. And I was thinking for ages,
like, what's a good name for this character? And then the more I was like, okay, well,
don't try and, you know, think through it logically. What's the vibe of Winwin? And to me,
like in my mind, Moloky is like, and I dress as it in the video, like, it's red and black. It's
kind of like very, you know, hyper focused on its one goal you must win. So Winwin is kind of
actually like these colors. It's like purple turquoise. It loves games too. It loves a little
bit of healthy competition, but constrained, like kind of like before, like nose out of ring fence,
zero sum competition into like just the right amount, whereby its externalities can be controlled
and kept positive. And then beyond that, it also loves cooperation, coordination, love,
all these other things. But it's also kind of like mischievous. Like, you know, it will have
a good time. It's not like kind of like boring, you know, like, oh, God, it's, you know, it's
how to have fun. It can get like, it can get down. But ultimately, it's unbelievably wise,
and it just wants the game to keep going. And I call it Winwin. Winwin. That's a good, like,
pet name. Yes. Winwin. The, I think the Winwin, right? And I think it's formal name when it has
to do like official functions is Omnia. Omnia. Yeah. From like omniscience, kind of, what's,
why Omnia? It's just like Omnia. It's just like Omwin. Omniwin. But I'm open to suggestions. I
would like, you know, and this is. I like Omnia. Yeah. But there's an angelic kind of sense to
Omnia though. So Winwin is more fun. So it's more like, it embraces the fun aspect. I mean,
there is something about sort of, there's some aspect to Winwin interactions that requires
embracing the chaos of the game and enjoying the game itself. I don't know. I don't know what that
is. That's almost like a zen like appreciation of the game itself, not optimizing for the consequences
of the game. Right. Well, it's recognizing the value of competition in of itself. It's not like
about winning. It's about you enjoying the process of having a competition and not knowing whether
you're going to win or lose this little thing. But then also being aware that, you know, what's
the boundary? How big do I want competition to be? Because one of the reasons why Molek is doing so
well now in our society, in our civilization is because we haven't been able to ring fence competition.
You know, and so it's just having all these negative externalities and it's we've completely
lost control of it. You know, it's, I think my guesses are now we're getting really like,
you know, metaphysical technically. But I think we'll be, we'll be in a more interesting universe
if we have one that has both pure cooperation, you know, lots of cooperation and some pockets
of competition than one that's purely competition, cooperation entirely. Like it's good to have some
little zero sum this bits. But I don't know that fully. And I'm not qualified as a philosopher to
know that. And that's what reverse Molek. So this kind of win win creature is in a system as an
antidote to the Molek system. Yes. And I don't know how it's going to do that. But it's good to kind
of try to start to formulate different ideas, different frameworks of how we think about that.
Exactly. At the small scale of a collection of individuals, a large scale of a society.
Exactly. It's a meme. I think it's, I think it's an example of a good meme. And I'm open,
I'd love to hear feedback from people if they think it's at, you know, they have a better idea
or it's not, you know, but it's the direction of meme that we need to spread this idea of like,
look for the win wins in life. Well, on the topic of beauty filters, on that particular context
where Molek creates negative consequences, what, you know, Dostoevsky said beauty will save the
world. What is beauty anyway? It would be nice to just try to discuss what kind of thing we would
like to converge towards in our understanding of what is beautiful. So to me, I think something
is beautiful when it can't be reduced down to easy metrics. Like if you think of a tree,
what is it about a tree, like a big ancient beautiful tree, right? What is it about it
that we find so beautiful? It's not, you know, the, you know, what are the sweetness of its fruit
or the value of its lumber. It's, it's this entirety of it that is, there's these immeasurable
qualities. It's like almost like a qualia of it. That's both like it walks this fine line between
pattern, well, it's got lots of patternicity, but it's not overly predictable. You know, again,
it walks this fine line between order and chaos. It's a very highly complex system.
And the, you know, you can't, it's evolving over time, you know, the definition of a complex
versus, and this is another Schmacktenberger thing, you know, a complex versus a complicated system.
A complicated system can be sort of broken down into bits, understood, and then put that together.
A complex system is kind of like a black box. It does all this crazy stuff. But if you take it
apart, you can't put it back together again, because it's, there's, there's all these intricacies.
And also very importantly, like the, there's some of the parts, sorry, the sum of the whole
is much greater than the sum of the parts. And that's where the beauty lies, I think.
And I think that extends to things like art as well. Like there's something, there's something
immeasurable about it. There's something we can't break down to a narrow metric.
Does that extend to humans, you think? Yeah, absolutely.
So how can Instagram reveal that kind of beauty, the complexity of a human being?
Good question.
And this takes us back to our dating sites and good reads, I think.
Very good question. I mean, well, I know what it shouldn't do. It shouldn't try and like, right now,
you know, one of the, I was talking to like a social media expert recently, because I was like,
Oh, I hate things. The social media expert.
Oh, yeah. There are like agencies out there that you can like outsource because I'm thinking about
working with one to like, so I want to start a podcast.
You should, you should have done it a long time ago.
Working on it. It's going to be called win win. And it's going to be about this like positive
some stuff. And the thing that, you know, they always come back and say is like, well, you need
to like, figure out what your thing is, you know, you need to narrow down what your thing is and
then just follow that, have like a sort of a formula, because that's what people want.
They want to know that they're coming back to the same thing. And that's the advice on YouTube,
Twitter, you name it. And that's why, and the trouble with that is that it's a complexity
reduction. And generally speaking, complex, you know, complexity reduction is bad. It's
making things more, it's an oversimplification. Not that simplification is always a bad thing.
But when you're trying to take, you know, what is social media doing is trying to like,
encapsulate the human experience and put it into digital form and commodify it to an extent.
So you do that, you compress people down into these like, narrow things.
And that's why I think it's kind of ultimately fundamentally incompatible
with at least my definition of beauty.
It's interesting because there is some sense in which a simplification, sort of in the Einstein
kind of sense of a really complex idea, a simplification in a way that still captures some
core power of an idea of a person is also beautiful. And so maybe it's possible for
social media to do that, a presentation, a sort of a slither, a slice, a look into a person's life
that reveals something real about them. But in a simple way, in a way that can be displayed
graphically or through words, some way, I mean, in some way, Twitter can do that kind of thing.
A very few set of words can reveal the intricacies of a person. Of course, the viral machine that
spreads those words often results in people taking the thing out of context. People often
don't read tweets in the context of the human being that wrote them. The full history of the
tweets they've written, the education level, the humor level, the world view they're playing
around with, all that context is forgotten and people just see the different words. So that can
lead to trouble. But in a certain sense, if you do take it in context, it reveals some kind of
quirky little beautiful idea or a profound little idea from that particular person that
shows something about that person. So in that sense, Twitter can be more successful if we talk
about mollusks is driving a better kind of incentive. Yeah. I mean, how they can, if we were to
rewrite, is there a way to rewrite the Twitter algorithm so that it stops being the fertile
breeding ground of the culture wars? Because that's really what it is. I mean, maybe I'm giving it
Twitter too much power, but just the more I looked into it, and I had conversations with
Tristan Harris from Center of Human Technology, and he explained it as Twitter is where you
have this amalgam of human culture, and then this terribly designed algorithm that amplifies the
craziest people, and the angriest, the angriest, most divisive takes and amplifies them. And then
the media, the mainstream media, because all the journalists are also on Twitter, they then
are informed by that. And so they draw out the stories they can from this already like
very boiling lava of rage, and then spread that to their millions and millions of people
who aren't even on Twitter. And so honestly, I think if I could press a button, turn them off,
I probably would at this point, because I just don't see a way of being compatible with healthiness,
but that's not going to happen. And so at least one way to like stem the tide and make it less
monarchy would be to change, at least if like it was on a subscription model, then it's now not
optimizing for impressions, because basically what it wants is for people to keep coming back
as often as possible. That's how they get paid, right? Every time an ad gets shown to someone,
and the way is to get people constantly refreshing their feed. So you're trying to encourage
addictive behaviors. Whereas if someone, if they moved on to at least a subscription model, then
they're getting the money either way, whether someone comes back to the site once a month or
500 times a month, they get the same amount of money. So now that takes away that incentive
to use technology, to build, to design an algorithm that is maximally addictive.
That would be one way, for example. Yeah, but you still want people to...
Yeah, I just feel like that just slows down, creates friction in the virality of things.
But that's good. We need to slow down virality. It's good. It's one way.
Virality is mollic, to be clear. So mollic is always negative, then.
Yes, by definition. Yes, but then I disagree with you.
Competition is not always negative. Competition is neutral.
I disagree with you that all virality is negative, then, is mollic, then. Because
it's a good intuition, because we have a lot of data on virality being negative.
But I happen to believe that the core of human beings, so most human beings, want to be good
more than they want to be bad to each other. And so I think it's possible. It might be just
harder to engineer systems that enable virality, but it's possible to engineer systems that are viral,
that enable virality, and the kind of stuff that rises to the top is things that are positive.
And positive, not like lala positive. It's more like win, win,
meaning a lot of people need to be challenged. Wise things, yes.
You grow from it. It might challenge you. You might not like it, but you ultimately grow from it.
And ultimately, bring people together as opposed to tear them apart.
I deeply want that to be true. And I very much agree with you that people at their core
are on average good as opposed to care for each other as opposed to not.
I think it's actually a very small percentage of people are truly wanting to do just destructive,
malicious things. Most people are just trying to win their own little game,
and they don't mean to be, they're just stuck in this badly designed system.
That said, the current structure, yes. The current structure means that virality is
optimized towards mollock. That doesn't mean there aren't exceptions. Sometimes positive
stories do go viral, and I think we should study them. I think there should be a whole field of
study into understanding, identifying memes that above a certain threshold of the population agree
as a positive, happy, bringing people together meme, the kind of thing that brings families
together that would normally argue about cultural stuff at the table, at the dinner table.
Identify those memes and figure out what was the ingredient that made them spread that day.
Also, not just happiness and connection between humans, but connection between humans in other
ways that enables productivity, cooperation, solving difficult problems and all those kinds
of stuff. It's not just about let's be happy and have a fulfilling lives. It's also like,
let's build cool shit. Which is the spirit of collaboration, which is deeply anti mollock.
It's not using competition. It's like mollock hates collaboration and coordination and people
working together. Again, the internet started out as that. It could have been that, but because
of the way it was structured in terms of very lofty ideal, they wanted everything to be open
source and also free, but they needed to find a way to pay the bills anyway because they were
still building this on top of our old economics system. The way they did that was through third
party advertisement, but that meant that things were very decoupled. You've got this third party
interest, which means that people are having to optimize for that. The actual consumer is
actually the product, not the person you're making the thing for. In the end, you stop making the
thing for the advertiser. That's why it then breaks down. There's no clean solution to this,
and it's a really good suggestion by you actually to figure out how we can optimize
virality for positive sum topics. I shall be the general of the lovebot army. Distributed.
Just even in saying that, the power already went to my head. No. Okay. You've talked about
quantifying your thinking. We've been talking about this, a game theoretic view on life
and putting probabilities behind estimates. If you think about different trajectories,
you can take through life, just actually analyzing life in a game theoretic way,
like your own life, like personal life. I think you've given an example that you had an honest
conversation with the ego about how long is this relationship going to last. Similar to our marriage
problem discussion, having an honest conversation about the probability of things that we sometimes
are a little bit too shy or scared to think of in probabilistic terms. Can you speak to that
kind of way of reasoning, the good and the bad of that? Can you do this kind of thing with human
relations? Yeah. The scenario you're talking about, it was like... Yeah. Tell me about that scenario.
I think it was about a year into our relationship, and we were having a fairly heavy conversation
because we were trying to figure out whether or not I was going to sell my apartment. He'd already
moved in, but I think we were just figuring out what our long term plans should be. Should we buy
a place together, et cetera. When you guys start having that conversation, are you drunk out of
your mind on wine or is you sober and you're actually having a serious... I think we were sober.
How do you get to that conversation? Because most people are kind of afraid to have that
kind of serious conversation. Well, our relationship was very... Well, first of all, we were good
friends for a couple of years before we even got romantic. When we did get romantic, it was very
clear that this was a big deal. It wasn't just another random thing.
So the probability of it being a big deal was high? It was already very high. Then we'd been
together for a year, and it had been pretty golden and wonderful. There was a lot of foundation
already where we felt very comfortable having a lot of frank conversations. But Igor's MO has
always been much more than mine. He was always from the outset. Just in a relationship, radical
transparency and honesty is the way, because the truth is the truth, whether you want to hide it
on where it will come out eventually. If you aren't able to accept difficult things yourself,
then how could you possibly expect to be the most integral version? The relationship needs
this bedrock of honesty as a foundation, more than anything. Yeah, that's really interesting,
but I would like to push against some of those ideas, but let's throw them up.
Don, the line, yes, throw them up. I just rudely interrupt.
And so we'd been about together for a year, and things were good, and we were having this hard
conversation. And then he was like, well, okay, what's the likelihood that we're going to be
together in three years then? Because I think it was roughly a three year time horizon. And I was
like, oh, interesting. And then we were like, actually, wait, before you said out loud, let's
both write down our predictions formally. Because we'd been like, we were just getting into like
effective altruism and rationality at the time, which is all about making, you know,
formal predictions as a means of measuring your own, well, your own foresight, essentially, in a
quantified way. So we like both wrote down our percentages. And we also did a one year
prediction and a 10 year one as well. So we got percentages for all three.
And then we showed each other. And I remember like having this moment of like,
because for the 10 year one, I was like, well, I mean, I love them a lot, but like a lot can
happen in 10 years, you know, and we've only been together for, you know, so I was like,
I think it's over 50%, but it's definitely not 90%. And I remember like wrestling, I was like,
but I don't want him to be hurt. I don't want him to, you know, I don't want to give a number
lower than his. And I remember thinking, I was like, don't game it. This is an exercise in radical
honesty. So just give your real percentage. And I think mine was like 75%. And then we showed
each other. And luckily, we were fairly well aligned. But honestly, if we weren't 20%, it
definitely would have, I, if his had been consistently lower than mine, that would have
rattled me for sure. Whereas if it had been the other way around, I think he would have,
he's just kind of like a water off the duck's back type of guy. It'd be like, okay, well,
all right, we'll figure this out. Well, did you guys provide airbars on the estimate? Like the
level. They came built in, we didn't give formal plus or minus error bars. I didn't draw any or
anything like that. Well, I guess that's the question I have is, did you feel informed enough
to make such decisions? Because like, I feel like if you were, if I were to do this kind of thing
rigorously, I would want some data. I would want to say that one of the assumptions you have is
you're not that different from other relationships. Right. And so I want to have some data about the
way. You want the base rates. Yeah. And also actual trajectories of relationships. I would
love to have like time series data about the ways that relationships fall apart or prosper,
how they collide with different life events, losses, job changes moving,
both partners find jobs. Only one has a job. I want that kind of data and how often the
different trajectories change in life. Like how informative is your past to your future?
That's the whole thing I got. Can you look at my life and have a good prediction about,
in terms of my characteristics of my relationships with what that's going to look like in the future
or not? I don't even know the answer to that question. I'll be very ill informed in terms of
making the probability. I would be far, yeah, I just would be under informed. I would be under
informed. I'll be over biasing to my prior experiences, I think. Right. But as long as you're
aware of that and you're honest with yourself, and you're honest with the other person, say,
look, I have really wide error bars on this for the following reasons. That's okay. I still think
it's better than not trying to quantify it at all if you're trying to make really major irreversible
life decisions. I feel also the romantic nature of that question. For me personally, I try to
live my life thinking it's very close to 100%. Allowing myself, actually, this is the difficulty
of this, is allowing myself to think differently. I feel like has a psychological consequence.
That's one of my pushbacks against radical honesty is this one particular perspective.
So you're saying you would rather give a falsely high percentage to your partner?
Going back to the wide sage film. In order to create this additional optimism.
Helm youth. Yes.
Of fake it till you make it. The positive, the positive thinking.
Hashtag positivity. Yeah, hashtag. Well, so that and this comes back to this idea of useful
fictions. And I agree. I don't think there's a clear answer to this and I think it's actually
quite subjective. Some people this works better for than others. To be clear, Igor and I weren't
doing this formal prediction in it. We did it with very much tongue in cheek. It wasn't like
we were going to make, I don't think it even would have drastically changed what we decided to do
even. We kind of just did it more as a fun exercise.
For the consequence of that fun exercise, there was a deep honesty to it too.
Exactly. It was a deep, and it was just like this moment of reflection. I'm like, oh wow,
I actually have to think through this quite critically and so on. And it's also what was
interesting was I got to check in with what my desires were. So there was one thing of what
my actual prediction is, but what are my desires and could these desires be affecting my predictions
and so on. And that's a method of rationality. And I personally don't think it loses anything in
terms of, it didn't take any of the magic away from our relationship. Quite the opposite. It
brought us closer together because it was like, we did this weird fun thing that I appreciate.
A lot of people find quite strange. And I think it was somewhat unique in our relationship that
both of us are very, we both love numbers. We both love statistics. We're both poker players.
So this was kind of like our safe space anyway. For others, one partner really might not like
that kind of stuff at all, in which case it's not a good exercise to do. I don't recommend it to
everybody. But I do think it's interesting sometimes to poke holes in the probe at these
things that we consider so sacred that we can't try to quantify them, which is interesting because
that's intention with the idea of what we just talked about with beauty and what makes something
beautiful, the fact that you can't measure everything about it. And perhaps something
shouldn't be tried to measure. Maybe it's wrong to completely try and put a utilitarian
frame of measuring the utility of a tree in its entirety. I don't know. Maybe we should, maybe
we shouldn't. I'm ambivalent on that. But overall, people have too many biases. People
are overly biased against trying to do a quantified cost benefit analysis on really tough life
decisions. They're like, oh, just go with your gut. It's like, well, sure. But our intuitions
are best suited for things that we've got tons of experience in. Then we can really
trust on it if it's a decision we've made many times. But if it's like, should I marry this
person? Or should I buy this house over that house? You only make those decisions a couple
of times in your life, maybe. Well, I would love to know there's a balance that probably is a
personal balance of strike is the amount of rationality you apply to a question versus
the useful fiction, the fake it till you make it. For example, just talking to soldiers in Ukraine,
you ask them, what's the probability of you winning, Ukraine winning? Almost everybody
I talk to is 100%. Wow. And you listen to the experts. They say all kinds of stuff.
Right. First of all, the morale there is higher than probably enough. I've never been to a war
zone before this. But I've read about many wars. And I think the morale in Ukraine is higher than
almost anywhere I've read about. It's every single person in the country is proud to fight for their
country. Everybody, not just soldiers, not everybody. Why do you think that is specifically
more than in other wars? I think because there's perhaps a dormant desire for the citizens of
this country to find the identity of this country because it's been going through this 30 year
process of different factions and political bickering. And they haven't had, as they talk about,
they haven't had their independence war. They say all great nations have had an independence war.
They had to fight for their independence, for the discovery of the identity of the core of the ideals
that unify us. And they haven't had that. There's constantly been factions. There's been divisions.
There's been pressures from empires, from United States and from Russia, from NATO in Europe.
Everybody telling them what to do. Now they want to discover who they are. And there's that kind
of sense that we're going to fight for the safety of our homeland, but we're also going to fight for
our identity. And that on top of the fact that there's just, if you look at the history of Ukraine
and there's certain other countries like this, there are certain cultures are feisty in their
pride of being part of being the citizens of that nation. Ukraine is that, Poland was that.
You just look at history. In certain countries, you do not want to occupy. I mean, both Stalin and
Hitler talked about Poland in this way. They're like, this is a big problem if we occupy this
land for prolonged periods of time. They're going to be a pain in their ass. They're not going to
be want to be occupied. And certain other countries are like pragmatic. They're like, well, leaders
come and go. I guess this is good. Ukrainians, throughout the 20th century, don't seem to be
the kind of people that just sit calmly and let the quote unquote occupiers impose their
roots. That's interesting though, because you said it's always been under conflict and leaders
have come and gone. So you would expect them to actually be the opposite under that reason.
Because it's a very fertile land. It's great for agriculture. So a lot of people want to,
I mean, I think they've developed this culture because they've constantly been occupied by
different people for the different peoples. And so maybe there is something to that where
you've constantly had to feel like within the blood of the generations, there's the struggle for
or against the man, against the imposition of rules against oppression and all that kind of
stuff. And that stays with them. So there's a will there. But a lot of other aspects are also
part of that has to do with the reverse, small kind of situation where social media has definitely
played a part of it. Also different charismatic individuals have had to play a part. The fact
that the president of the nation, Zelensky, stayed in Kiev during the invasion is a huge
inspiration to them because most leaders, as you could imagine, when the capital of the nation is
under attack, the wise thing, the smart thing that the United States advised Zelensky to do
is to flee and to be the leader of the nation from a distant place. He said, fuck that,
I'm staying put. Everyone around him, there was a pressure to leave and he didn't. And that in
those singular acts really can unify a nation. There's a lot of people that criticize Zelensky
within Ukraine. Before the war, he was very unpopular, even still. But they put that aside
for the, especially that singular act of staying in the capital. Yeah, a lot of those kinds of things
come together to create something within people.
These things always, of course though, which, how zoomed out of a view do you want to take?
Because yeah, you describe it as like an anti Moloch thing happened within Ukraine because
it brought the Ukrainian people together in order to fight a common enemy. Maybe that's a good thing,
maybe that's a bad thing. In the end, we don't know how this is all going to play out. But if you
zoom it out on a global level, they're coming together to fight. That could make a conflict
larger. You know what I mean? I don't know what the right answer is here. It seems like a good
thing that they came together. But we don't know how this is all going to play out. If this all
turns into a nuclear war, we'll be like, okay, that was the bad, that was... Oh yeah. So I was
describing the reverse Moloch for the local level. Exactly. Now, this is where the experts come in
and they say, well, if you channel most of the resources of the nation and the nation supporting
Ukraine into the war effort, are you not beating the drums of war that is much bigger than Ukraine?
In fact, even the Ukrainian leaders are speaking of it this way. This is not a war between two
nations. This is the early days of a world war. If we don't play this correctly. Yes.
We need cool heads from our leaders. From Ukraine's perspective, Ukraine needs to win the war
because what is winning the war mean is coming up, coming to peace negotiations, an agreement
that guarantees no more invasions. And then you make an agreement about what land belongs to
whom. You stop that. And basically, from their perspective is you want to demonstrate to the
rest of the world who's watching carefully, including Russia and China and different players on the
geopolitical stage, that this kind of conflict is not going to be productive if you engage in it.
So you want to teach everybody a lesson, let's not do World War III. It's going to be bad for
everybody. It's a lose, lose. It's a deep lose, lose. Doesn't matter. And I think that's actually
a correct, when I zoom out, 99% of what I think about is just individual human beings and human
lives and just that war is horrible. But when you zoom out and think from a geopolitics perspective,
we should realize that it's entirely possible that we will see a World War III in the 21st
century. And this is like a dress rehearsal for that. So the way we play this as a human
civilization will define whether we do or don't have a World War III.
You know, how we discuss war, how we discuss nuclear war, the kind of leaders we elect
and prop up, the kind of memes we circulate. Because you have to be very careful when you're
being pro Ukraine, for example, you have to realize that you are also indirectly feeding
the ever increasing military industrial complex. So be extremely careful that
when you say pro Ukraine or pro anybody, you're pro human beings, not pro the machine,
that creates narratives that says it's pro human beings. But it's actually if you look
at the raw use of funds and resources, it's actually pro making weapons and shooting bullets
and dropping bombs. Right. The real, we have to just somehow get the meme into everyone's heads
that the real enemy is war itself. That's the enemy we need to defeat. And that doesn't mean
to say that there isn't justification for small local scenarios, adversarial conflicts. If you
have a leader who is starting wars, they're on the side of team war, basically. It's not that
they're on the side of team country, whatever that country is, it's they're on the side of team war.
So that needs to be stopped and put down. But you also have to find a way that your
corrective measure doesn't actually then end up being coopted by the war machine
and creating greater war. Again, the playing field is finite. The scale of
conflict is now getting so big that the weapons that can be used are so mass destructive
that we can't afford another giant conflict. We just, we won't make it.
What existential threat in terms of us not making it, are you most worried about?
What existential threat to human civilization? We got like, let's go down a dark path, huh?
Well, no, it's a dark. No, it's like, well, we're in the somber place, we might as well.
Some of my best friends are dark paths. What worries you most? We mentioned
asteroids, we mentioned AGI, nuclear weapons. The one that's on my mind the most,
mostly because I think it's the one where we have actually a real chance to move the needle on
in a positive direction or more specifically stop some really bad things from happening,
really dumb, avoidable things is bioresks. In what kind of bioresks?
In terms of, yeah, so many. Of course, we have risks from natural pandemics,
naturally occurring viruses or pathogens. Then also as time and technology goes on and technology
becomes more and more democratized into the hands of more and more people, the risk of synthetic
pathogens. Whether or not you fall into the camp of COVID was gain of function,
accidental lab leak, or whether it was purely naturally occurring. Either way,
we are facing a future where synthetic pathogens or like, human meddled with pathogens
either accidentally get out or get into the hands of bad actors, whether they're omnicide or maniacs,
either way. That means we need more robustness for that. You would think that us having this nice
little dry run, which is what as awful as COVID was in all those poor people that died, it was
still like child's play compared to what a future one could be in terms of fatality rate.
We would then be much more robust in our pandemic preparedness. Meanwhile, the budget
in the last two years for the US, sorry, they just did this, I can't remember the name of what
the actual budget was, but it was like a multi trillion dollar budget that the US just set aside.
Originally in that, considering that COVID cost multiple trillions to the economy,
the original allocation in this new budget for future pandemic preparedness was $60 billion,
so tiny proportion of it. That proceeded to get whittled down to like $30 billion,
to $15 billion, all the way down to $2 billion out of multiple trillions for a thing that has
just cost us multiple trillions. We've just finished, we're barely even, we're not even
really out of it. It basically got whittled down to nothing because for some reason people think
that, oh right, we've got the pandemic out the way, that was that one. The reason for that is that
people are, and I say this with all due respect to a lot of the science community, but there's an
immense amount of naivety about, they think that nature is the main risk moving forward and it
really isn't. I think nothing demonstrates this more than this project that I was just reading
about that's sort of being proposed right now called Deep Vision. The idea is to go out into
the wild, and we're not talking about just like within cities, deep into caves that people don't
go to, deep into the Arctic, wherever, scour the earth for whatever the most dangerous possible
pathogens could be, that they can find. Then not only do you try and find these, bring samples of
them back to laboratories. Again, whether you think COVID was a lab leak or not, I'm not going to
get into that, but we have historically had so many, as a civilization, we've had so many
lab leaks from even like the highest level security things. People should go and just read,
it's like a comedy show of just how many they are, how leaky these labs are, even when they do their
best efforts. Bring these things then back to civilization. That's step one of the badness.
The next step would be to then categorize them, do experiments on them and categorize them by
their level of potential pandemic lethality. Then the piece of resistance on this plan is to then
publish that information freely on the internet about all these pathogens, including their genome,
which is literally like the building instructions of how to do them on the internet. This is something
that genuinely a pocket of the scientific community thinks is a good idea. I think on expectation,
and their argument is, oh, this is good because it might buy us some time to develop vaccines,
which, okay, sure, maybe would have made sense prior to mRNA technology, but
we can develop a vaccine now when we find a new pathogen within a couple of days.
Now then there's all the trials and so on. Those trials would have to happen anyway,
in the case of a brand new thing. You're saving maybe a couple of days, so that's the upside.
Meanwhile, the downside is, you're not only bringing the risk of these pathogens of getting
leaked, but you're literally handing it out to every bad actor on earth who would be doing
cartwheels. I'm talking about Kim Jong Un, ISIS, people who want, the rest of the world is their
enemy. In some cases, they think that killing themselves is a noble cause, and you're literally
giving them the building blocks of how to do this. It's the most batshit idea I've ever heard. On
expectation, it's probably minus EV of multiple billions of lives, if they actually succeeded
in doing this. Certainly in the tens or hundreds of millions. The cost benefit is so unbelievably,
it makes no sense. I was trying to wrap my head around, what's going wrong in people's minds
to think that this is a good idea. It's not that it's malice or anything like that. I think it's
that people don't, the proponents, they're actually overly naive about the interactions of
humanity. They're all bad actors who will use this for bad things. Because not only will it,
if you publish this information, even if a bad actor couldn't physically make it themselves,
which in 10 years time, the technologies are getting cheaper and easier to use.
But even if they couldn't make it, they could now bluff it. What would you do if there's some
deadly new virus that we've published on the internet in terms of its building blocks? Kim
Jong Un could be like, hey, if you don't let me build my nuclear weapons, I'm going to release
this. I've managed to build it. Well, now he's actually got a credible bluff. We don't know.
And so that's, it's just like handing the keys, it's handing weapons of mass destruction to
people. Makes no sense. The possible, I agree with you, but the possible world in which you might
make sense is if the good guys, which is a whole another problem defining who the good guys are,
but the good guys are like an order of magnitude, higher competence. And so they can stay ahead
of the bad actors by just being very good at the defense, by very good, not meaning like a little
bit better, but an order of magnitude better. But of course, the question is in each of those
individual disciplines, is that feasible? Can you, can the bad actors, even if they don't have
the competence, leap frog to the place where the good guys are? Yeah, I mean, I would agree in
principle, with pertaining to this like particular plan of like, that, you know, with the thing I
described this deep vision thing, where at least then that would maybe make sense for
steps one and step two of like getting the information, but then why would you release
it, the information to your literal enemies? You know, that's, that makes, that doesn't fit at all
in that perspective of like trying to be ahead of them. You're literally handing them the weapon.
But there's different levels of release, right? So there's the kind of secrecy where you don't
give it to anybody. But there's a release where you incrementally give it to like major labs.
So it's not public release, but it's like, you're giving it to different layers of
reasonability. But the problem there is it's going to, if you go anywhere beyond like complete
secrecy, it's going to leak. That's the thing. It's very hard to keep secrets. And so that's
still, so you might as well release it to the public is that argument. So you either go complete
secrecy or you release it to the public. So, which is essentially the same thing. It's going to leak
anyway. If you don't do complete secrecy, right? Which is why you shouldn't get the information
in the first place. Yeah. I mean, what in that, I think, well, that's a solution. Yeah. The solution
is either don't get the information in the first place or be keep, keep it incredibly,
incredibly contained. See, I think, I think it really matters which discipline we're talking
about. So in the case of biology, I do think you're a very right. We shouldn't even be,
it should be forbidden to even like, think about that. Meaning don't collect, don't just even
collect the information, but like, don't do, I mean, gain of function research is a really iffy
area. Like you start, I mean, it's all about cost benefits, right? There are some scenarios
that I could imagine the cost benefit of a gain of function research is very, very clear,
where you've evaluated all the potential risks factored in the probability that things can go
wrong. And like, you know, not only known unknowns, but unknown unknowns as well, tried to quantify
that. And then even then it's like orders of magnitude better to do that. I'm behind that
argument. But the point is, is that there's this like naivety that's preventing people from even
doing the cost benefit properly on a lot of the things. Because, you know, the science community,
they're like, again, I don't want to bucket the science community, but like some people within
the science community just think that everyone's, everyone's good and everyone just cares about
getting knowledge and doing the best for the world. And unfortunately, that's not the case. I
wish we lived in that world, but we don't. Yeah, I mean, there's a lie. Listen, I've been
criticizing the science community broadly quite a bit. There's so many brilliant people that
brilliance is somehow hindering sometimes because it has a bunch of blind spots. And then you start
to look at a history of science, how easily it's been used by dictators to any conclusion they want.
And it's, it's, it's dark, how you can use brilliant people that like playing the little
game of science, because it is a fun game. You know, you're building, you're going to conferences,
you're building on top of each other's ideas, breakthroughs. I think I've realized how this
particular molecule works and I could do this kind of experiment and everyone else is impressed.
Oh, cool. No, I think you're wrong. Let me show you why you're wrong. And that little game,
everyone gets really excited and they get excited. Well, it came up with a pill that
solves this problem and it's going to help a bunch of people. And I came up with a giant study
that shows the exact probability it's going to help or not. And you get lost in this game
and you forget to realize this game, just like Molek, it can have like unintended consequences
and unintended consequences that might destroy human civilization or divide human civilization
or have dire geopolitical consequences. I mean, the effects of, I mean, it's just so,
the most destructive effects of COVID have nothing to do with the biology of the virus,
it seems like. I mean, I could just list them forever. But like one of them is the complete
distrust of public institutions. The other one is because of that public distrust, I feel like if
a much worse pandemic came along, we as a world have now cried wolf. And if an actual wolf now
comes, people will be like, fuck masks, fuck vaccines, fuck everything. And they won't be,
they'll distrust every single thing that any major institution is going to tell them.
Yeah. Because that's the thing, there were certain actions made by certain health public figures
where they told, they very knowingly told, it was a white lie, it was intended in the best possible
way such as early on when there was clearly a shortage of masks. And so they said to the public,
oh, don't get masks, there's no evidence that they work. Don't get them, they don't work. In fact,
it might even make it worse. You might even spread it more. That was the real stinker.
Yeah, no, no. Unless you know how to do it properly, you're going to get sicker or you're
more likely to catch the virus, which is just absolute crap. And they put that out there. And
it's pretty clear the reason why they did that was because there was actually a shortage of masks
because then they really needed it for health workers, which makes sense. I agree. But the
cost of lying to the public when that then comes out, people aren't as stupid as they think they
are. And that's, I think, where this distrust of experts has largely come from. A, they've lied
to people overtly. But B, people have been treated like idiots. Now, that's not to say that a lot
of stupid people who have a lot of wacky ideas around COVID and all sorts of things. But if you
treat the general public like children, they're going to see that they're going to notice that and
that is going to just like absolutely decimate the trust in the public institutions that we depend
upon. And honestly, the best thing that could happen, I wish like if like Fauci or, you know,
and these other like leaders who I mean, God, I would, I can't imagine how nightmare his job
has been for the last few years, hell on earth. Like, so, you know, I have a lot of sort of
sympathy for the position he's been in. But like, if he could just come out and be like, okay, look,
guys, hands up, we didn't handle this as well as we could have. These are all the things I would
have done differently in hindsight. I apologize for this and this and this and this. That would go
so far. And maybe I'm being naive. Who knows, maybe this would backfire. But I don't think it
would like to someone like me even, because I've like, I've lost trust in a lot of these things.
I'm, I'm fortunate that at least no people who I can go to who I think are good, like have good
epistemics on this stuff. But, you know, if they, if they could sort of put their hands on, we go,
okay, these are the spots where we screwed up this, this, this. This was our reasons. Yeah,
we actually told a little white lie here, we did it for this reason, we're really sorry,
but they just did the radical honesty thing, the radical transparency thing.
That would go so far to build rebuilding public trust. And I think that's what needs to happen.
Yeah, I totally agree with you. Unfortunately, his job was very tough and all those kinds of things,
but I see arrogance and arrogance prevented him from being honest in that way previously.
And I think arrogance will prevent him from being honest in that way. Now we need leaders. I think
young people are seeing that, that kind of talking down to people from a position of power.
Or I hope is, is the way of the past. People really like authenticity and they, they like
leaders that are like a man and a woman of the people. And I think that just,
I mean, he still has a chance to do that, I think. I mean, I don't think, you know,
if I doubt he's listening, but if he is like, hey, I, I think, you know,
I don't think he's irredeemable by any means. I think there's, you know,
I don't, I don't have an opinion of whether there was arrogance or there or not. Just know that,
I think, like coming clean on the, you know, it's understandable to have fucked up during
this pandemic. Like I won't expect any government to handle it well because it was so difficult,
like so many moving pieces, so much like lack of information and so on. But the step to
rebuilding trust is to go, okay, look, we're doing a scrutiny of where we went wrong. And I,
and for my part, I did this wrong in this part. And that would be huge.
All of us can do that. I mean, I was struggling for a while whether I want to talk to him or not.
I talked to his boss, Francis Collins. Another person that's screwed up in terms of trust,
lost a little bit of my respect too. There seems to have been a kind of dishonesty in the,
in the back rooms, in that they didn't trust people to be intelligent. Like we need to tell them
what's good for them. We know what's good for them. That kind of idea.
To be fair, the thing that's, what's it called? I heard the phrase today,
nut picking. Social media does that. So you've got like nitpicking. Nut picking is where
the craziest stupidest, you know, if you have a group of people, let's call, you know, let's say
people who are vaccine, I don't like the term anti vaccine, people who are vaccine hesitant,
vaccine speculative, you know, what social media did or the media or anyone, you know,
their opponents would do is pick the craziest example. So the ones who are like,
you know, I think I need to inject myself with motor oil up my ass or something, you know,
select the craziest ones and then have that beamed to, you know, so from like someone like Fauci
or Francis's perspective, that's what they get because they're getting the same social media
stuff as us. They're getting the same media reports. I mean, they might get some more information,
but they too are going to get these, the nuts portrayed to them. So they probably have a
misrepresentation of what the actual public's intelligence is.
Well, that actually, that just, yes, and that just means they're not social media savvy.
So one of the skills of being on social media is to be able to filter that in your mind,
like to understand, to put into proper context.
To realize that what you are seeing to social media is not anywhere near an accurate representation
of humanity.
Not picking a letter. And there's nothing wrong with putting motor oil up your ass.
It's just one, it's one of the better aspects. I do this every weekend. Okay.
How did that analogy come from in my mind? Like what?
I don't know. I think you need to, there's some Freudian thing you would need to deeply
investigate with a therapist. Okay. What about AI? Are you worried about
AI, superintelligence systems, or paperclip maximizer type of situation?
Yes. I'm definitely worried about it. But I feel kind of bipolar in the, some days I wake up and
I'm like, you're excited about the future?
Well, exactly. I'm like, wow, we can unlock the mysteries of the universe, you know, escape the
game. And this, this, you know, because I spend all my time thinking about these
Molyke problems that, you know, what, what is the solution to them? What, you know,
in some ways you need this like omnibenevolent, omniscient, omnivise
coordination mechanism that can like make us all not do the, the, the Molyke thing.
Or like provide the infrastructure or redesign the system so that it's not vulnerable to this
Molyke process. And in some ways, you know, that's, that's the strongest argument to me for
like the race to build AGI is that maybe, you know, we can't survive without it.
But the flip side to that is the, the, the, the, the, unfortunately now that there's multiple
actors trying to build AI, AGI, you know, this was, this was fine 10 years ago when it was just
DeepMind, but then other companies started up and now it created a race dynamic. Now it's like,
that's the whole thing is at the same, it's got the same problem. It's like,
whichever company is the one that like optimizes for speed at the cost of safety will get the
competitive advantage. And so we, we're the more likely the ones to build the AGI, you know, and,
and that's the same cycle that you're in. And there's no clear solution to that because you
can't just go like slapping, you know, the, if you go and try and like stop all the different
companies, then it will, you know, the good ones will stop because they're the ones, you know,
within, you know, within the West's reach, but then that leaves all the other ones to continue.
And then they're even more likely. So it's like, it's a very difficult problem with no clean solution.
And, you know, at the same time, you know, I know the, at least some of the folks at DeepMind
and they're incredible and they're thinking about this, they're very aware of this problem. And
they're like, you know, I think some of the smartest people on earth.
Yeah, the culture is important there because they are thinking about that and they're
there. Some of the best machine learning engineers. So it's possible to have a company or a community
of people that are both great engineers and are thinking about the philosophical topics.
Exactly. And importantly, they're also game theorists, you know, and because this is ultimately
a game theory problem, the thing this, this mollock mechanism and like, you know, what this rate,
how do we voice rate your arms race scenarios? You need people who aren't naive to be thinking
about this. And again, like, luckily, there's a lot of smart, non naive game theorists within
that group. Yes, I'm concerned about it. And I think it's again, a thing that we need
people to be thinking about in terms of like, how do we create, how do we mitigate the arms race
dynamics? And how do we solve the thing of it? It's got, Bostrom calls it the orthogonality
problem, whereby, because obviously there's a chance, you know, the belief, the hope is,
is that you build something that's super intelligent. And by definition of being super
intelligent, it will also become super wise and have the wisdom to know what the right goals are.
And hopefully those goals include keeping humanity alive, right? But Bostrom says that
actually those two things, you know, on super intelligence and super wisdom,
aren't necessarily correlated. They're actually kind of orthogonal things. And how do we make
it so that they are correlated? How do we guarantee it? Because we need it to be guaranteed,
really, to know that we're doing the thing safely.
But I think that like, merging of intelligence and wisdom, at least my hope is that this whole
process happens sufficiently slowly, that we're constantly having these kinds of debates,
that we have enough time to, to figure out how to modify each version of the system as it
becomes more and more intelligent. Yes, buying time is a good thing, definitely. Anything that
slows everything down. We just, everyone needs to chill out. We've got millennia to figure this out.
Or at least, at least, well, it depends again, some people think that, you know,
we can't even make it through the next few decades without having some kind of
omnibus coordination mechanism. And there's also an argument to that. Yeah, I don't know.
Well, there is, I'm suspicious of that kind of thinking, because it seems like the entirety
of human history has people in it that are like predicting doom just around the corner.
There's something about us that is strangely attracted to that thought. It's almost like
fun to think about the destruction of everything. Just objectively speaking,
I've talked and listened to a bunch of people and they are gravitating towards that. I think
it's the same thing that people love about conspiracy theories, is they love to be the
person that kind of figured out some deep fundamental thing about the, that's going to be,
it's going to mark something extremely important about the history of human civilization,
because then I will be important. When in reality, most of us will be forgotten and life will go on.
And one of the sad things about whenever anything traumatic happens to you, whenever
you lose loved ones, or just tragedy happens, you realize life goes on. Even after a nuclear war,
that will wipe out some large percentage of the population and will torture people for years
to come because of the sort of, I mean, the effects of a nuclear winter. People will still
survive. Life will still go on. I mean, it depends on the kind of nuclear war. But in
case of a nuclear war, it will still go on. That's one of the amazing things about life.
It finds a way. And so in that sense, I just, I feel like the doom and gloom thing is a...
Well, yeah, we don't want a self fulfilling prophecy.
Yes, that's exactly.
Yes. And I very much agree with that. And I even have a slight feeling from the amount of time
we spent in this conversation talking about this, because it's like, is this even a net positive
if it's like making everyone feel, in some ways, like making people imagine these bad scenarios
can be a self fulfilling prophecy. But at the same time, that's weighed off with at least
making people aware of the problem and gets them thinking. And I think particularly,
you know, the reason why I want to talk about this to your audience is that on average,
they're the type of people who gravitate towards these kind of topics because they're
intellectually curious and they can sort of sense that there's trouble brewing.
Yeah. They can smell that there's, you know, I think there's a reason people are thinking
about this stuff a lot is because the probability, the probability for, you know,
it's increased in probability over the, certainly over the last few years,
trajectory's have not gone favorably. Let's put it, you know, since 2010. So it's right,
I think, for people to be thinking about it. But that's where they're like, I think,
whether it's a useful fiction or whether it's actually true or whatever you want to call it,
I think having this faith, this is where faith is valuable, because it gives you at
least this like anchor of hope. And I, and I'm not just saying it to like trick myself,
like I do truly, I do think there's something out there that wants us to win.
Yeah.
I think there's something that really wants us to win. And it just, you just have to be like,
just like, okay, now I sound really crazy, but like, open your heart to it a little bit.
Yeah. And it will give you the like, the sort of breathing room with which to marinate
on the solutions. We are the ones who have to come up with solutions, but
we can use that there's like, there's hashtag positivity. There's value in that.
Yeah. You have to kind of imagine all the destructive trajectories that lay in our future
and then believe in the possibility of avoiding those trajectories. All while you said audience,
all while sitting back, which is majority, the two people that listen to this are probably sitting
on a beach smoking some weed. That's a beautiful sunset. They're looking at just the waves going
in and out. And ultimately, there's a kind of deep belief there in the momentum of humanity to
figure it all out. But we've got a lot of work to do. Which is what makes this whole simulation,
this video game kind of fun. This battle of polytopia. I still, man, I love those games so
much. That's so good. And that one for people who don't know, but battle polytopia is a big,
is like a, is this really radical some simplification of a civilization type of game.
It still has a lot of the skill tree development, a lot of the strategy. But it's easy enough to
play on a phone. Yeah. It's kind of interesting. They've really figured it out. It's one of the
most elegantly designed games I've ever seen. It's incredibly complex. And yet being, again,
it walks that line between complexity and simplicity in this really, really great way.
And they use pretty colors that hack the dopamine reward circuits in our brains very well.
It's fun. Video games are so fun. Most of this life is just about fun, escaping all the suffering
to find the fun. What's energy healing? I have in my notes energy healing question mark. What's
that about? Oh, man. God, your audience is going to think I'm mad. So the two crazy things that
happened to me, the one was the voice in the head that said, you're going to win this tournament.
And then I won the tournament. The other craziest thing that's happened to me was in 2018,
I started getting this weird problem in my ear where it was low frequency sound distortion
where voices, particularly men's voices, became incredibly unpleasant to listen to.
It would create this. It would be falsely amplified or something. And it was almost
like a physical sensation in my ear, which was really unpleasant. And it would last for a few
hours and then go away and then come back for a few hours and go away. And I went and got hearing
tests and they found that the bottom end, I was losing the hearing in that ear. And in the end,
I got, doctors said they think it was this thing called Meniere's disease, which is this very
unpleasant disease where people basically end up losing their hearing, but they get this like,
it often comes with like dizzy spells and other things because it's like the inner ear gets all
messed up. Now, I don't know if that's actually what I had, but that's what at least a couple of
one doctor said to me. But anyway, so I'd had three months of this stuff, this going on,
it was really getting me down. And then I was at Burning Man of all places. I don't mean to be
that person talking about Burning Man, but I was there. And again, I'd had it and I was unable
to listen to music, which is not what you want, because Burning Man is a very loud, intense place.
And I was just having a really rough time. And on the final night, I get talking to this girl
who's like a friend of a friend. And I mentioned, I was like, oh, I'm really down in the dumps about
this. And she's like, oh, well, I've done a little bit of energy healing. Would you like me to have
a look? And I was like, sure. Now, this is again, deep, I was, you know, no time in my life for
this. I didn't believe in any of this stuff. I was just like, it's all bullshit. It's all wooing
nonsense. I was like, sure, have a go. And she starts with her hand and she says, oh,
there's something there. And then she leans in and she starts sucking over my ear, not actually
touching me, but close to it with her mouth. And it was really unpleasant. I was like, well,
can you stop? She's like, no, no, no, there's something there. I need to get it. And I was
like, no, no, no, I really don't like it. Please. This is really loud. She's like, I need to just
bear with me. And she does it. And I don't know how long for a few minutes. And then she eventually
collapses on the ground, like freezing cold crying. And I'm just like, I don't know what the hell is
going on. I mean, I thoroughly freaked out, as is everyone else watching, just like, what the
hell? I mean, like, warm her up. And she was like, what? She was really shaken up. And she's like,
I don't know what that, she said it was something very unpleasant and dark. Don't worry, it's gone.
I think you'll be fine in a couple, you'll have the physical symptoms for a couple of weeks and
you'll be fine. But, you know, she was just like that. You know, so I was, I was so rattled, A,
because the potential that actually I had had something bad in me that made someone feel bad,
and that she was scared. That was what, you know, I was like, wait, I thought you do this,
this is a thing. Now you're terrified, like you pulled like some kind of exorcism or something
like that. What the fuck is going on? So it, like just the most insane experience. And frankly,
it took me like a few months to sort of emotionally recover from it. But my ear problem went away
about a couple of weeks later. And touch wood, I've not had any issues since. So
that gives you like hints that maybe there's something out there.
I mean, I don't, I, again, I don't have an explanation for this. The most probable explanation
was, you know, I was a burning man. I was in a very open state. Let's just leave it at that.
And, you know, placebo is an incredibly powerful thing and a very not understood thing.
So almost assigning the word placebo to it reduces it down to a way that
it doesn't deserve to be reduced down. Maybe there's a whole science of what we call placebo.
Maybe there's a placebo is a door. Self healing. Yeah. You know, and I mean, I don't know what the
problem was. Like I was told it was many years. I don't want to say I definitely had that because
I don't want people to think that, oh, that's how, you know, if they do have that, because it's
terrible disease. And if they have that, that this is going to be a guaranteed way for it to fix
for them. I don't know. And I also don't, I don't, you're absolutely right to say, like,
using even the word placebo is like, it comes with this like baggage of, of like frame. And I
don't want to reduce it down. All I can do is describe the experience and what happened.
I cannot put an ontological framework around it. I can't say why it happened, what the mechanism was,
what the problem even was in the first place. I just know that something crazy happened.
And it was while I was in an open state. And fortunately for me, it made the problem go away.
But what I took away from it, again, it was part of this, you know, this took me on this
journey of becoming more humble about what I think I know. Because as I said before, I was like,
I was in the like Richard Dawkins train of atheism in terms of there is no God. There's
everything like that is bullshit. We know everything. We know, you know, the only way we
can get through, we know how medicine works and its molecules and chemical interactions and that
kind of stuff. And now it's like, okay, well, there's, there's clearly more for us to understand.
And that doesn't mean that it's ascientific as well. Because, you know, the beauty of the scientific
method is that it still, it still can apply to this situation. Like I don't see why, you know,
I would like to try and test this experimentally. I haven't really, you know, I don't know how we
would go about doing that, we'd have to find other people with the same condition, I guess, and like
try and repeat repeat the experiment. But it doesn't just because something happens,
that's sort of out of the realms of our current understanding, it doesn't mean that
it's the scientific method can't be used for it.
Yeah, I think the scientific method sits on a foundation of those kinds of experiences.
Because a scientific method is a process to carve away at the mystery all around us. And
experiences like this is just a reminder that we're mostly shrouded in mystery still. That's it.
It's just like a humility. Like we haven't really figured this whole thing out.
But at the same time, we have found ways to act, you know, we're clearly doing something right,
because think of the technological scientific advancements, the knowledge that we have,
that blow people's minds even from 100 years ago.
Yeah, and we've even allegedly got out to space and landed on the moon. Although I still haven't,
I have not seen evidence of the earth being round, but I'm keeping an open mind.
Speaking of which, you studied physics in astrophysics.
Just to go to that and just to jump around through the fascinating life you've had,
how did that come to be? When did you fall in love with astronomy and space and things like this?
As early as I can remember. I was very lucky that my mom and my dad, but particularly my mom,
my mom is like the most nature. She is Mother Earth. It's the only way to describe her.
Just she's like, Dr. Do little animals flock to her and just like sit and look at her adoringly.
And she sings.
Yeah, she's just, she just is Mother Earth. And she has always been fascinated by,
you know, she doesn't have any, you know, she never went to university or anything like that.
She's actually phobic of maths. If I try and get her to like, you know, I was trying to teach her
poker when she hated it. But she's so deeply curious. And that just got instilled in me when,
you know, we would sleep out under the stars whenever it was, you know, the two nights a year
when it was warm enough in the UK to do that. And we'll just lie out there until we fell asleep
looking at looking for satellites, looking for shooting stars. And I was just always,
I don't know whether it was from that, but I've always naturally gravitated to like
the biggest, the biggest questions. And also the like, the most layers of abstraction.
I love just like, what's the meta question? What's the meta question and so on.
So I think it just came from that really. And, and, and then on top of that, like physics,
you know, it also made logical sense in that it was a, it was, it was the degree, it was a degree
that was subject to tick the box of being, you know, answering these really big picture questions,
but it was also extremely useful. It like has a very high utility in terms of, I didn't know
necessarily, I thought I was going to become like a research scientist. My original plan was,
I want to be a professional astronomer. So it's not just like a philosophy degree that asks the
big questions. And it's not like biology in the path to go to medical school or something like
that, which is overly pragmatic, not overly is, is very pragmatic. But this is, yeah, physics is
a good combination of the two. Yeah, at least for me, it made sense. And I was good at it. I
liked it. Yeah. I mean, it wasn't like I did an immense amount of soul searching to choose it or
anything. It just was like this. It made the most sense. I mean, you have to make this decision
in the UK age 17, which is crazy. Because, you know, in US, you go the first year, you do a bunch
of stuff, right? And then you choose your major. I think the first few years of college, you focus
on the drugs and only as you get closer to the end, do you start to think, oh, shit, this wasn't
about that. And I'm, I owe the government a lot of money. How many alien civilizations are out
there? When you, when you looked up at the stars with your mom, and you were counting them,
what's your mom think about the number of alien civilizations? I don't know. I would imagine
she would take the viewpoint of, you know, she's pretty humble. And she knows how many, she knows
there's a huge number of potential spawn sites out there. So she would spawn sites, spawn sites.
Yeah. You know, this is our spawn site. Yeah. Spawn sites in Polytopia. We spawned on Earth.
You know, it's, hmm. Yeah. Spawn sites. Why does that feel weird to say spawn? Because it makes
me feel like it's, there's only one source of life and it's spawning in different locations.
That's why the word spawn, because like, it feels like life that originated on Earth
really originated here. Right. It is, it is unique to this particular. Yeah. I mean, but I don't,
in my mind, it doesn't exclude, you know, the completely different forms of life and
different biochemical soups can't also spawn. But I guess it implies that there's some spark
that is, which I kind of like the idea of. And then I get to think about respawning
like after it dies. Like what happens if life on Earth ends? Is it, is it going to restart again?
Probably not. It depends. Maybe Earth is too. It depends on the type of, you know, what's the
thing that kills it, kills it off, right? If it's a paperclip maximizer, not, you know, for the,
for the example, but, you know, some kind of very self replicating, you know, high on the
capabilities, very low on the wisdom type thing. So whether that's, you know, gray goo, green goo,
you know, like nanobots or just a shitty, misaligned AI that thinks it needs to turn
everything into paperclips. You know, if it's something like that, then it's going to be very
hard for life, you know, complex life. Because by definition, you know, a paperclip maximizer
is the ultimate instantiation of Moloch. Deeply low complexity, over optimization on a single
thing, sacrificing everything else, turning the whole world into. Although something tells me,
like if we actually take a paperclip maximizer, it destroys everything. It's a really dumb system
that just envelops the whole of Earth. And it diverts beyond. I didn't, I didn't know that part.
But okay, great. So it becomes a multi planetary paperclip maximizer.
Well, it just, it just propagates. I mean, it depends whether it figures out how to jump the
vacuum gap. But again, I mean, this is all silly, because it's a hypothetical thought experiment,
which I think doesn't actually have much practical application to the AI safety problem. But
it's just a fun thing to play around with. But if by definition, it is maximally intelligent,
which means it is maximally good at navigating the environment around it in order to achieve its
goal, but extremely bad at choosing goals in the first place. So again, we're talking on this
orthogonality thing, right? It's very low on wisdom, but very high on capability. Then it will
figure out how to jump the vacuum gap between planets and stars and so on. And thus just turn
every atom it gets its hands on into paperclips. Yeah, by the way, for people who which is maximum
virality, by the way, that's what virality is. But it does not mean that virality is necessarily
all about maximizing paperclips. In that case, it is. So for people who don't know,
this is just a thought experiment example of an AI system that has a goal and is willing to do
anything to accomplish that goal, including destroying all life on earth and all human
life and all of consciousness in the universe for the goal of producing a maximum number of paperclips.
Okay. Or whatever its optimization function was that it was set up.
But don't you think... It could be making, recreating lexes. Maybe it'll tie all the
universe in lex. Go on. I like this idea and I'm just kidding.
That's better. That's more interesting than paperclips.
That could be infinitely optimal if I were to say so myself.
But if you ask me, it's still a bad thing because it's permanently capping what the
universe could ever be. That's its end to it.
Or achieving the optimal that the universe could ever achieve. But that's up to different people
have different perspectives. But don't you think within the paperclip world that would emerge
just like in the zeros and ones that make up a computer that would emerge beautiful complexities?
Like it won't suppress. As you scale to multiple planets and throughout,
there'll emerge these little worlds that on top of the fabric of maximizing paperclips,
there would emerge little societies of paperclips.
We're not describing a paperclip maximizer anymore. Because if you think of what a paperclip is,
it is literally just a piece of bent iron. So if it's maximizing that throughout the
universe, it's taking every atom it gets its hand on into somehow turning it into iron or steel
and then bending it into that shape and then done and done.
And by definition, like paperclips, there is no way for, well, okay, so you're saying that
paperclips somehow will just emerge and create gravity or something?
There's a dynamic element to the whole system. It's not just, it's creating those paperclips
and the act of creating, there's going to be a process and that process will have a dance to it.
Because it's not like sequential thing. There's a whole complex three dimensional system of
paperclips, you know, like, you know, people like string theory, right? It's supposed to be strings
that are interacting in fascinating ways. I'm sure paperclips are very string like they can be
interacting very interesting ways as you scale exponentially through three dimensional. I mean,
I'm sure the paperclip maximizer has to come up with a theory of everything. It has to create
like wormholes, right? It has to break like, it has to understand quantum mechanics.
I love your optimism. This is where I'd say we're going into the realm of pathological optimism,
wherever it's. I'm sure there'll be a, I think there's an intelligence that emerges from that
system. You're saying that basically intelligence is inherent in the fabric of reality and will
find a way kind of like, Goldblum says life will find a way you think life will find a way even
out of this perfectly homogenous dead soup. It's not perfectly homogenous. It has to,
it's perfectly maximal in the production. I don't know why people keep thinking it's
it maximizes the number of paperclips. That's the only thing. It's not trying to be homogenous.
It's trying to try to maximize paperclips. So you're saying, you're saying that because it,
because, you know, kind of like in the big bang, or, you know, it seems like, you know,
things, there were clusters. There was more stuff here than there. That was enough of the
patternicity that kickstarted the evolutionary process. The little weirdnesses that will make
it beautiful. Even out of, so yeah. A flood city emerges.
Interesting. Okay. Well, so how does that line up then with the whole
heat death of the universe, right? Because that's another sort of instantiation of this. It's like
everything becomes so far apart and so cold and so perfectly mixed that it's like
homogenous, grayness. Do you think that even out of that homogenous grayness where there's no,
you know, negative entropy, that, you know, there's no free energy that we understand,
even from that new. Yeah. The paperclip maximizer or any other intelligence systems will figure
out ways to travel to other universes to create big bangs within those universes or through black
holes to create whole other worlds to break the, what we consider the limitations of physics.
The paperclip maximizer will find a way if a way exists and we should be humbled to realize that
we don't. Yeah, but because it just wants to make more paperclips. So it's going to go into
those universes and turn them into paperclips. Yeah. But we humans, not humans, but complex
systems exist on top of that. We're not interfering with it. This complexity emerges from the simple
base state. The simple base. Yeah. Whether it's, you know, plank lens or paperclips is the base
unit. Yeah. You can think of like the universe as a paperclip maximizer because it's doing some
dumb stuff. Like physics seems to be pretty dumb. It has like, I don't know if you can summarize it.
Yeah. The laws are fairly basic and yet out of them amazing complexity emerges.
And its goals seem to be pretty basic and dumb. If you can summarize its goals, I mean, I don't
know what's a nice way. Maybe laws of thermodynamics could be good. I don't know if you can assign
goals to physics, but if you formulate in the sense of goals, it's very similar to
paperclip maximizing in the dumbness of the goals. But the pockets of complexity as it
emerges is where beauty emerges. That's where life emerges. That's where intelligence. That's
where humans emerge. And I think we're being very down on this whole paperclip maximizer thing.
No. The reason we hate it. I think, yeah, because what you're saying is that you
think that the force of emergence itself is another like unwritten, well, not unwritten,
but like another baked in law of reality. Yeah. And you're trusting that emergence will find a way
to even out of seemingly the most moleky, awful, you know, plain outcome emergence will still
find a way. I love that as a philosophy. I think it's really nice. I would wield it carefully
because there's large error bars on that and the certainty of that.
How about we build the paperclip maximizer and find out?
Classic. Yeah. Molec is doing cartwheels. Man.
Yeah. But the thing is, it will destroy humans in the process, which is the thing,
which is the reason we really don't like it. We seem to be really holding on to this whole
human civilization thing. Would that make you sad if AI systems that are beautiful,
that are conscious, that are interesting and complex and intelligent ultimately lead to the
death of humans? Would that make you sad? If humans led to the death of humans, sorry.
Like if they would supersede humans. Oh, if some AI.
Yeah. AI would end humans. I mean, that's the reason why I'm like,
in some ways, less emotionally concerned about AI risk as then say, you know,
bio risk. Because at least with AI, there's a chance, you know, if we're in this hypothetical
where it wipes out humans, but it does it for some like higher purpose, it needs our atoms
to an energy to do something. At least now, there's the universe is going on to do something
interesting. Whereas if it wipes everything, you know, bio like just kills everything on
Earth. And that's it. And there's no more, you know, Earth cannot spawn anything more
meaningful in the in the few hundred million years it has left left, because it doesn't have much
time left. Then, yeah, I don't know that. So one of my favorite books I've ever read is Novescene
by James Lovelock, who sadly just died. He wrote it when he was like 99. He died aged 102. So it's
a fairly new book. And he sort of talks about that that he thinks it's, you know, sort of
building off this Gaia theory, where like, Earth is like living some form of intelligence itself,
and that this is the next like step, right, is this this whatever this new intelligence
that is maybe silicon based as opposed to carbon based goes on to do. And it's a really sort of
in some ways an optimistic but really fatalistic book. I don't know if I fully subscribe to it,
but it's a beautiful piece to read anyway. So am I sad by that idea? I think so, yes. And actually,
yeah, this is the reason why I'm sad by the idea, because if something is truly brilliant and wise
and smart and truly super intelligent, it should be able to figure out abundance. So
if it figures out abundance, it shouldn't need to kill us off. It should be able to find a way for
us. It should be there's plenty. The universe is huge. There should be plenty of space for it to go
out and do all the things it wants to do and like give us a little pocket where we can continue
doing our things and we can continue to do things and so on. And again, if it's so supremely wise,
it shouldn't even be worried about the game theoretic considerations that by leaving us alive,
we'll then go and create another like super intelligent agent that it then has to compete
against, because it should be omnivise and smart enough to not have to concern itself with that.
Unless it deems humans to be kind of assholes. The humans are a source of a lose, lose kind of
dynamics. Well, yes and no. We're not. Moloch is. That's why I think it's important to say.
But maybe humans are the source of Moloch. No. I mean, I think game theory is the source of
Moloch because Moloch exists in nonhuman systems as well. It happens within agents,
within a game, in terms of like, it applies to agents, but it can apply to a species that's on
an island of animals. Rats outcompeting the ones that massively consume all the resources of the
ones that are going to win out over the more like chill socialized ones and so creates this
Malthusian trap. Moloch exists in little pockets in nature as well. So it's not a strictly human
thing. I wonder if it's actually a result of consequences of the invention of predator and
prey dynamics. Maybe AI will have to kill off every organism that. Now you're talking about
killing off competition. Not competition, but just like the way it's like the weeds or whatever
in a beautiful flower garden or the parasites on the whole system. Now, of course, it won't do
that completely. It'll put them in a zoo like we do with parasites. It'll ring fence. Yeah,
and there'll be somebody doing a PhD on like they'll prod humans with a stick and see what they do.
But I mean, in terms of letting us run wild outside of the, you know, geographic and
straight region that might be that he might have decided to. No, I think there's obviously
the capacity for beauty and kindness and non, non Moloch behavior amidst humans. So I'm pretty
sure AI will preserve us. Let me, I don't know if you answered the aliens question. You had a
good conversation with Toby, Toby or yes, about various sides of the universe. I think, did he
say, now I'm forgetting, but I think he said it's a good chance we're alone. So the classic,
you know, Fermi paradox question is, there are so many spawn points. And yet, you know, it didn't
take us that long to go from harnessing fire to sending out radio signals into space. So surely,
given the vastness of space we should be, and you know, even if only a tiny fraction of those
create life and other civilizations too, we should be, the universe should be very noisy.
There should be evidence of Dyson spheres or whatever, you know, like at least radio signals
and so on. But seemingly, things are very silent out there. Now, of course, it depends on who you
speak to. Some people say that they're getting signals all the time and so on. And like, I don't
want to make an epistemic statement on that. But it seems like there's a lot of silence. And so
that raises this paradox. And then say, you know, the Drake equation. So the Drake equation is like
basically just a simple thing of like trying to estimate the number of possible civilizations
within the galaxy by multiplying the number of stars created per year by the number of stars
that have planets, planets that are habitable, blah, blah, blah. So all these like different
factors. And then you plug in numbers into that. And you, you know, depending on like the range of,
you know, your lower bound and your upper bound point, point estimates that you put in, you get
out a number at the end for the number of civilizations. But what Toby and his crew did
differently was Toby, this is a researcher at the Future Humanity Institute. They, instead of,
they realized that it's like basically a statistical quirk that if you put in point sources,
even if you think you're putting in conservative point sources, because on some of these variables,
the, the uncertainty is so large, it spans like maybe even like a couple of hundred of orders
of magnitude. By putting in point sources, it's always going to lead to overestimates.
And so they, by putting stuff on a log scale, or actually they did it on like a log log scale on
some of them. And then like ran the simulation across the whole bucket of uncertainty across
all of those orders of magnitude. When you do that, then actually the number comes out much,
much smaller. And that's the more statistically rigorous, you know, mathematically correct way
of doing the calculation. It's still a lot of hand waving. As science goes, it's, it's like
definitely, you know, just waving, I don't know what an analogy is, but it's hand wavy. And anyway,
when they did this, and then they did a Bayesian update on it as well to like factor in the fact
that there is no evidence that we're picking up because, you know, no evidence is actually a form
of evidence, right? And the long and short of it comes out that the, we're roughly around 70%
to be the only intelligent civilization in our galaxy thus far, and around 50 50 in the entire
observable universe, which sounds so crazily counterintuitive, but their math is legit.
Well, yeah, the math around this particular equation, which is equations, ridiculous on many
levels, but the, the, the night, the powerful thing about the equation is there's the different
things, different components that can be estimated and the error bars on which can be reduced with
science and enhance throughout since the equation came out, the error bars have been coming out
on different aspects. And so that it almost kind of says what like this gives you a mission to reduce
the error bars on these estimates now over a period of time. And once you do, you can better
and better understand like in the process of redoing the error bars, you'll get to understand
actually what is the right way to find out where the aliens are, how many of them there are,
and all those kinds of things. So I don't think it's good to use that for an estimation. I think
you do have to think from like, more like from first principles, just looking at what life is on
earth, like, and trying to understand the very physics based biology, chemistry, biology based
question of what is life, maybe computation based, what the fuck is this thing? And that like, how
difficult does it to create this thing? It's one way to say like, how many plants like this are
out there, all that kind of stuff, but it feels like from our very limited knowledge perspective,
the right ways to think how how does what is this thing and how does it originate from,
from very simple non life things, how does complex life like things emerge from from a rock
to a bacteria protein, and these like weird systems that encode information and pass
information from self replicate, and then also select each other and mutate in interesting
ways such that they can adapt and evolve and build increasingly more complex systems.
Right. Well, it's a form of information processing, right? Right. Whereas information transfer,
but then also an energy processing, which then results in I guess information processing,
maybe I'm getting bogged down. Well, it's always doing some modification and yeah,
the input is some energy. Right. It's able to extract, yeah, extract resources
from its environment in order to achieve a goal. But the goal doesn't seem to be clear.
Right. The goal is, well, the goal is to make more of itself.
Yeah. But in a way that increases, I mean, I don't know if evolution is a fundamental law of the
universe, but it seems to want to replicate itself in a way that maximizes the chance of its survival.
Individual agents within an ecosystem do. Yes. Yes. Evolution itself doesn't give a fuck.
Right. It's a very, don't care. It's just like, oh, you optimize it. Well, at least it's certainly,
yeah, it doesn't care about the welfare of the individual agents within it, but it does seem to,
I don't know. I think it's, I think the mistake is that we're anthropomorphizing. It's to even try
and give evolution a mindset because it is, there's a really great post by Elie as Yidkowsky on
Less Wrong, which is an alien god. And he talks about the mistake we make when we try and put
on mind, think through things from an evolutionary perspective as though we're giving evolution
like some kind of agency and what it wants. Yeah, worth reading, but yeah.
I would like to say that having interacted with a lot of really smart people that say that
anthropomorphization is a mistake, I would like to say that saying that anthropomorphization is
a mistake is a mistake. I think there's a lot of power in anthropomorphization. If I can only say
that word correctly one time, I think that's actually a really powerful way to reason through
things. I think people, especially people in robotics seem to run away from it as fast as
possible. Can you give an example of like how it helps in robotics?
Oh, that our world is a world of humans and to see robots as fundamentally just tools
runs away from the fact that we live in a world, a dynamic world of humans,
that like all these game theory systems we've talked about that a robot that ever has to
interact with humans. And I don't mean like intimate friendship interaction. I mean in a
factory setting where it has to deal with the uncertainty of humans, all that kind of stuff.
You have to acknowledge that the robot's behavior has an effect on the human,
just as much as the human has an effect on the robot. And there's a dance there.
And you have to realize that this entity, when a human sees a robot, this is obvious in a
physical manifestation of a robot, they feel a certain way. They have a fear, they have uncertainty,
they have their own personal life projections. If they have pets and dogs and the thing looks
like a dog, they have their own memories of what a dog is like, they have certain feelings. And
that's going to be useful in a safety setting, safety critical setting, which is one of the
most trivial settings for a robot, in terms of how to avoid any kind of dangerous situations.
And a robot should really consider that in navigating its environment. And we humans are
right to reason about how a robot should consider navigating its environment through
anthropomorphization. I also think our brains are designed to think in human terms,
like game theory, I think, is best applied in the space of human decisions.
And so... Right, you're dealing, I mean, with things like AI, AI is they are,
you know, we can somewhat, like, I don't think it's... The reason I say anthropomorphization,
we need to be careful with, is because there is a danger of overly applying,
overly wrongly assuming that this artificial intelligence is going to operate in any similar
way to us. Because it is operating on a fundamentally different substrate, like even
dogs or even mice or whatever in some ways, like anthropomorphizing them is less of a mistake,
I think, than an AI, even though it's an AI we built and so on. Because at least we know that
they're running from the same substrate. And they've also evolved from the same out of the same
evolutionary process. They've followed this evolution of needing to compete for resources
and needing to find a mate and that kind of stuff. Whereas an AI that has just popped into
an existence somewhere on a cloud server, let's say, or whatever, however it runs,
and whatever... I don't know whether they have an internal experience,
I don't think they necessarily do. In fact, I don't think they do. But the point is,
is that to try and apply any kind of modeling of thinking through problems and decisions in
the same way that we do has to be done extremely carefully because they're so alien,
their method of whatever their form of thinking is. It's just so different because they've never
had to evolve in the same way. Yeah, beautifully put. I was just playing devil's advocate. I do
think in certain contexts, anthropomorphization is not going to hurt you. Yes. Engineers run away
from it too fast. I can see that. From the most point you're right. Do you have advice for young
people today, like the 17 year old that you were, of how to live life you can be proud of,
how to have a career you can be proud of in this world full of mullocks?
Think about the windwinds. Look for windwind situations and be careful not to overly use
your smarts to convince yourself that something is windwind when it's not. That's difficult. I don't
know how to advise people on that because it's something I'm still figuring out myself. But
have that as a default MO. Don't see everything as a zero sum game. Try to find the positive
sumness and find ways to, if there doesn't seem to be one, consider playing a different game.
So I would suggest that. Do not become a professional poker player. Because people always
ask, they're like, oh, she's a pro. I want to do that too. Fine. You could have done it when I
started out. It was a very different situation back then. Poker is a great game to learn in order
to understand the ways to think. I recommend people learn it, but don't try and make a living from
it these days. It's very, very difficult to the point of being impossible. Then really,
really be aware of how much time you spend on your phone and on social media and really try
and keep it to a minimum. Be aware that basically every moment that you spend on it is bad for you.
So it doesn't mean to say you can never do it, but just have that running in the background.
I'm doing a bad thing for myself right now. I think that's the general rule of thumb.
Of course, about becoming a professional poker player, if there is a thing in your life
that's like that and nobody can convince you otherwise, just fucking do it.
Don't listen to anyone's advice. Find a thing that you can't be talked out of too. That's a thing.
I like that. You were a lead guitarist in the metal band. Did I write that down from something?
What did you do it for? The performing, was it the music of it? Was it just being a rock star?
Why did you do it? We only ever played two gigs. It wasn't very famous or anything like that,
but I was very into metal. It was my entire identity from the age of 16 to 23.
What's the best metal band of all time? Don't ask me that. It's so hard to answer.
I had a long argument with, I'm a guitarist, more like a classic rock guitarist.
I've had friends who are very big Pantera fans. There was often arguments about
what's the better metal band Metallica versus Pantera. This is a more 90s maybe discussion,
but I was always on the side of Metallica both musically and in terms of performance and the
depth of lyrics and so on. Basically, everybody was against me because if you're a true metal fan,
I guess the idea goes is you can't possibly be a Metallica fan. Metallica is pop. It's like
they sold out. Metallica are metal. You can't say who was the godfather of metal, but they
were so groundbreaking and so brilliant. You've named literally two of my favorite bands.
When you ask that question, or who are my favorites, those were two that came up.
A third one is Children of Bodom, who I just think, they just tick all the boxes for me.
Yeah, I don't know. Nowadays, I feel like a repulsion to the... I was that myself,
like I'd be like, who do you prefer more? Come on. You have to rank them,
but it's like this false zero somnus that's like, why? They're so additive. There's no conflict there.
When people ask that kind of question about anything, movies, I feel like it's hard work
and it's unfair, but you should pick one. That's actually the same kind of... It's like a fear
of a commitment. When people ask me what's your favorite band, it's like... It's good to pick.
Exactly. And thank you for the tough question. Yeah.
Well, maybe not in a context when a lot of people are listening.
Yeah, I was just like, what? Why does this matter? No, it does...
Are you still into metal?
Funny enough, I was listening to a bunch before I came over here.
Oh, like, do you use it for motivation or get you into certain...
Yeah, I was weirdly listening to 80s hair metal before I came.
Does that count as metal?
I think so. It's like proto metal and it's happy. It's optimistic, happy, proto metal.
Yeah, I mean, these things, all these genres bleed into each other.
But yeah, sorry to answer your question about guitar playing. My relationship with it was
kind of weird in that I was deeply uncreative. My objective would be to hear some really hard
technical solo and then learn it, memorize it, and then play it perfectly. But I was
incapable of trying to write my own music. The idea was just absolutely terrifying.
But I was also just thinking, I was like, it'd be kind of cool to actually try
starting a band again and getting back into it and write. But it's scary.
It's scary. I mean, I put out some guitar playing, just other people's covers,
like I play comfortably numb on the internet. It's scary too. It's scary putting stuff out there.
And I had this similar kind of fascination with technical playing both on piano and guitar.
One of the reasons I started learning guitar is from Ozzy Osbourne, Mr. Crowley's solo.
And one of the first solos I learned is that there's a beauty to it. There's a
lot of beauty to it. There's some tapping, but it's just really fast. Beautiful, like arpeggios.
Yeah, arpeggios. Yeah. And there's a melody that you can hear through it, but there's also a build
up. It's a beautiful solo, but it's also technically just visually the way it looks
when a person's watching you feel like a rock star playing. But it ultimately has to do with
technical... You're not developing the part of your brain that I think requires you to generate
beautiful music. It is ultimately technical in nature. And so that took me a long time to
let go of that and just be able to write music myself. And that's a different journey, I think.
I think of that journey as a little bit more inspired in the blues world, for example,
or improvisation is more valued, obviously in jazz and so on. But I think ultimately it's a more
rewarding journey because your relationship with the guitar then becomes a kind of escape
from the world where you can create. I mean, creating stuff is...
And it's something you work with because my relationship with my guitar was like it was
something to tame and defeat. Yeah, the challenge. Which was kind of what my whole personality
was back then. I was just very... As I said, very competitive, very just must
bend this thing to my will. Whereas writing music, it's like a dance. You work with it.
But I think because of the competitive aspect, for me at least, that's still there,
which creates anxiety about playing publicly or all that kind of stuff. I think there's just
like a harsh self criticism within the whole thing. It's really tough.
I want to hear some of your stuff. I mean, there's certain things that
feel really personal. And on top of that, as we talked about poker offline, there's certain
things that you get to a certain height in your life. And that doesn't have to be very high,
but you get to a certain height and then you put it aside for a bit. And it's hard to return to
it because you remember being good. And it's hard to... You being at a very high level in poker,
it might be hard for you to return to poker every once in a while and you enjoy it knowing that
you're just not as sharp as it used to be because you're not doing it every single day.
That's something I always wonder with... I mean, even just like in chess with Kasparov,
some of these greats, just returning to it, it's almost painful.
Yes, I can... Yeah.
And I feel that way with guitar too, because I used to play every day a lot. So returning to it is
painful because it's like accepting the fact that this whole ride is finite and you have a prime...
There's a time when you're really good and now it's over and now...
We're on a different chapter of life.
Yeah, it's like... But I miss that, yeah.
But you can still discover joy within that process. It's been tough, especially with some level of
like, as people get to know you and people film stuff, you don't have the privacy of just sharing
something with a few people around you. Yeah.
That's a beautiful privacy. That's a good point.
With the internet, it's just disappearing.
Yeah, that's a really good point.
Yeah. But all those pressures aside, if you really... You can step up and still enjoy the
fuck out of a good musical performance. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing?
What's the meaning of life?
It's in your name, as we talked about. Do you feel the requirement to have to live up to your name?
Because live?
Yeah.
No, because I don't see it. I mean, again, it's kind of like...
I don't know. Because my full name is Olivia.
Yeah.
So I can retreat in that and be like, oh, Olivia, what does that even mean?
Live up to live. No, I can't say I do because I've never thought of it that way.
Okay. And then your name backwards is evil, as we also talked about.
There's like layers of people there.
I mean, I feel the urge to live up to that, to be the inverse of evil.
Yeah. Or even better. Because I don't think...
Is the inverse of evil good or is good something completely separate to that?
I think... My intuition says it's the latter, but I don't know. Anyway, again, getting in the weeds.
What is the meaning of all this?
Of life.
Why are we here?
I think to explore, have fun and understand and make more of here and to keep the game going.
Of here? More of here?
More of this? Whatever this is?
More of experience. Just to have more of experience and ideally the positive experience.
And more... I guess try and put it into a sort of vaguely scientific term.
Make it so that the program required, the length of code required to describe the universe
is as long as possible. And highly complex and therefore interesting.
Because again, I know we bang the metaphor to death, but tiled with paperclips doesn't require
that much of a code to describe. Obviously, maybe something emerges from it. But that steady state,
assuming a steady state, it's not very interesting. Whereas it seems like our universe is over time
becoming more and more complex and interesting. There's so much richness and beauty and diversity
on this earth. And I want that to continue and get more. I want more diversity. And in the very
best sense of that word is, to me, the goal of all this.
Yeah. And somehow have fun in the process.
Because we do create a lot of fun things in this creative force and all the beautiful things
we create. Somehow there's like a funness to it. And perhaps that has to do with the finiteness
of life, the finiteness of all these experiences, which is what makes them kind of unique.
Like the fact that they end, there's this, whatever it is, falling in love or
creating a piece of art or creating a bridge or creating a rocket or creating a,
I don't know, just the businesses that build something or solve something. The fact that it
is born and it dies somehow embeds it with fun, with joy for the people involved. I don't know
what that is, the finiteness of it. It can do. Some people struggle with the,
you know, I mean, a big thing I think that one has to learn is being okay with things coming
to an end. And in terms of like projects and so on, right, people cling on to things beyond
what they're meant to be doing, you know, beyond what is reasonable.
And I'm going to have to come to terms with this podcast coming to an end.
I really enjoy talking to you. I think it's obvious, as we've talked about many times,
you should be doing a podcast. You should, you're already doing a lot of stuff publicly
to the world, which is awesome. And you're a great educator, you're a great mind,
you're great intellect. But it's also this whole medium of just talking is also fun.
It's a fun one. It really is good. And it's just, it's nothing but like, it's just so much fun.
And you can just get into so many, yeah, there's this space to just explore and see what comes
and emerges. And yeah, to understand yourself better. And if you're talking to others to
understand them better and together with them, I mean, you should do your, you should do your own
podcast, but you should also do a podcast with C as we talked about. The two of you have such
different minds that like melt together in just hilarious ways, fascinating ways, just
the tension of ideas there is really powerful. But in general, I think you got a beautiful
voice. So thank you so much for talking today. Thank you for being a friend. Thank you for
honoring me with this conversation and with your valuable time. Thanks, Liv. Thank you.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Liv Barry. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
Richard Feynman. I think it's much more interesting to live not knowing than to have answers,
which might be wrong. I have approximate answers and possible beliefs and different degrees of
uncertainty about different things. But I'm not absolutely sure of anything. And there are many
things I don't know anything about, such as whether it means anything to ask why we're here.
I don't have to know the answer. I don't feel frightened not knowing things by being lost in
a mysterious universe without any purpose, which is the way it really is, as far as I can tell.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.